While STAR KID isn't based on a comic book, it might as well be. However, unlike most superhero action movies, which aspire to be embraced by viewers of all ages, this feature is aimed at an exclusive sex and age group: preteen boys. But, while the picture is likely to appeal to many members of the target audience, those on the outside may be irritated by STAR KID's silly humor, flat characters, and juvenile writing. When it comes to live-action comic books, this is uninspired fare.
The basic premise of STAR KID (which was re-named from its more appropriate, original title, THE WARRIOR OF WAVERLY STREET) is that 12- year old Spencer (Joseph Mazzello), a comic book-loving nerd, sees a spaceship crash-land near his house one night. When he goes out to investigate, he discovers the "Phase I Assault Cybersuit," a living suit of armor that is designed to encase a humanoid host. Once locked inside "Cy," Spencer has some fun using his newfound abilities to do things like torment the local bully and get some drive-through fast food. But, with the arrival on Earth of a monstrous Broodwarrior, an enemy of the race that created Cy, the situation turns serious.
As superhero stories go, this one has all the necessary elements: an underdog who emerges on top, an oddball friendship (in this case, a boy and his alien armor), a nasty villain, lots of neat powers for our intrepid protagonist, and a big, climactic battle. Although competently brought to the screen by director Manny Coto (DR. GIGGLES), most of what goes on during STAR KID is strictly generic and by-the-book. It's worth noting that, while the special effects aren't state of the art, they're pretty impressive considering the film's low budget.
If you're looking for top-notch acting by "name" stars, this isn't the right movie. The most impressive performance in STAR KID is given by a special effect (Cy). Joseph Mazzello is adequate as Spencer, but his work here doesn't come close to his impressive turn in SHADOWLANDS; instead, it's more in line with his listless JURASSIC PARK output. The other actors are adequate, and one or two of the faces may look vaguely familiar, but no one is likely to get another job based exclusively on their dubious accomplishments here.
If the premise -- a human being gaining superpowers as a result of a special costume – sounds familiar, that could be because it was the idea behind last year's Shaquille O'Neal feature, STEEL. However, while the basic plot is a retread, at least the dialogue transcends the level of nonstop, predictable clichés. Although there's nothing in STAR KID that's likely to be mistaken for modern-day Shakespeare, surprisingly few of the lines are cringingly awful. In fact, from time to time, the characters in this movie speak like real people.
One thing that STAR KID has going for it is that it's rarely boring (although the repetitious climactic battle goes on for about 10 minutes too long). That's because of the notoriously short attention span of the target audience. Twenty years ago, I suppose I would have enjoyed this movie. Since then, however, my tastes have matured, and now I demand a little more intelligence and sophistication than STAR KID offers. Unless you're a boy between the ages of about 8 and 13, you're likely to find little of interest in this picture.
Copyright 1998 James Berardinelli
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"
- Ingmar Bergman
