SENSELESS is a completely generic comedy that is only occasionally enlivened by the on-screen antics of Marlon Wayans. Yet, while Wayans has the energy and malleable features to match those of Jim Carrey (whom he appears to be impersonating), he isn't endowed with quite as forceful a screen presence. Of course, it doesn't help that he isn't given much to work with. The screenplay is dumb, and director Penelope Spheeris, who has ridden her WAYNE'S WORLD success through a series of mediocre movies, can't seem to find a stable tone. She seems to be striving for something more sophisticated than mere physical comedy, but her attempts never reach fruition. In fact, there are isolated instances when SENSELESS almost seems grim.
The screenplay does nothing with a potentially-interesting premise. Darryl Witherspoon (Wayans) is one of the hardest working men on the Stratford University campus. Because he sends money home to support his mother and siblings, he has to work about three different jobs to make ends meet. So, when the medical department advertises for human guinea pigs to test out their latest serum -- a wonder drug that magnifies the effectiveness of all five senses -- Darryl is first in line to collect the $3000 offered for being a subject. But, although Darryl's first reactions to "Protocol 563" are negative (extreme itching, being bothered by seemingly-unobtrusive sounds, etc.), he soon begins to reap the benefits of having enhanced senses. He turns into a leading candidate for a position at the Smythe Bates corporation, becomes the protégé of one of Smythe Bates' top men, Randall Tyson (Rip Torn), is transformed into a hockey star, and starts a romantic relationship with a fellow student, Janice (Tamara Taylor). All of this doesn't sit well with Darryl's chief detractor, Scott Butler (David Spade), who is determined to do anything to undermine his rival's success.
For the most part, SENSELESS falls into the category of "underdog makes good." The autopilot script follows a well-known trajectory: someone gains confidence in himself because of an outside agent, then, once that agent has been removed, finds that his true strength comes from within. In a case like this, when there's not much to be found in how the plot is structured, the movie's success depends on whether it offers enough laughs to camouflage its deficiencies. Unfortunately, while SENSELESS can boast a few funny sequences, they're too few and far apart to allow me to describe this film as anything better than mundane.
Marlon Wayans' performance is uneven. On some occasions, such as when he's running around buck naked on a city street, he is hilarious, but there are times when he's more bland than funny. And the sporadic attempts to copy Jim Carrey didn't do anything for me. Surprisingly, Wayans is perhaps most effective when working through the romantic subplot. He and Tamara Taylor develop a nice rapport that isn't completely reliant upon sexual tension. David Spade, despite being given second billing, is pretty much a nonentity. Aside from an occasional low key put-down, Spade doesn't have much to do -- as a villain, he's decidedly unimpressive. Supporting performers include SCREAM's Matthew Lillard as Darryl's excessively-pierced roommate and Brad Dourif as the doctor in charge of the Protocol 563 experiment.
There's really not a lot more to say about this film. While the amusement level isn't high, the familiarity level is, but at least the movie is short enough that boredom never sets in. Those who prefer not to be challenged by motion pictures, and who are willing to endure the same regurgitated material time-after-time, may enjoy SENSELESS. For everyone else, the handful of good jokes aren't enough to justify ninety minutes in a theater.
Copyright 1998 James Berardinelli
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"
- Ingmar Bergman
