In this age of cynicism, it's unusual to find a film like WIDE AWAKE. The movie, brought to the screen by sophomore director M. Night Shyamalan, is Capra-esque in its outlook on life and death. And, while the ultimate result is somewhat uneven, there's no denying that WIDE AWAKE contains its share of affecting moments, and the production as a whole offers enough solid drama and legitimate emotion to earn it a recommendation not only for adults, but for older children as well, who will relate to the protagonist and narrator. It's definitely a two hankie movie, though.
This is the second movie in the past year to tackle the subject of how a child copes with death. And, like 1997's PONETTE, WIDE AWAKE forces its main character to explore questions of religion and the afterlife. However, while PONETTE used a documentary-like approach to depict a young girl's confusion and pain, Shyamalan's movie has a different agenda: presenting these issues within the framework of a modern-day fable. Watching PONETTE was, at times, a grueling experience. The same is not true of WIDE AWAKE, which leavens its serious moments with breaks of humor and lighter drama.
Joseph Cross is ten-year old Joshua Beal, a fifth-grader who attends a Catholic school for boys in suburban Philadelphia. Josh lives with his father (Denis Leary), mother (Dana Delany), and sister (Julia Stiles), but a key member of the family is absent. Josh's grandfather (Robert Loggia) recently died of bone marrow cancer, and his death has hit the young boy hard. The sudden void causes Josh, an extremely intelligent child, to begin questioning many aspects of life, truth, and religion. His quest for answers leads him to begin a year-long search for God.
The most obvious strength of WIDE AWAKE is its appeal. The film creates likable characters who engage the audience, and the storyline addresses sensitive, emotionally-compelling issues without becoming cloying. At times, the movie is manipulative, but it's a gentle, rather than forced, approach. I was genuinely moved by the relationship between Josh and his grandfather. The credit for this can be sliced into three portions -- one to Shyamalan, who wrote and directed the scenes; one to neophyte actor Joseph Cross, who is believable as the precocious Josh; and one to Robert Loggia, who is subdued and amiable in a part that is, for him, atypical. WIDE AWAKE contains other solid performances as well. Denis Leary submerges his outrageous personality to do a fine job as Josh's "normal" father. Likewise, Dana Delany exudes wholesomeness. Rosie O'Donnell has a small role as one of Josh's teachers -- a nun with a passion for the Philadelphia Phillies baseball team.
Shyamalan has clearly matured since 1992, when he wrote, directed, produced, and starred in his debut feature, PRAYING WITH ANGER. That film, about an American-born Indian making his first trip to India, was a cliché-riddled, uneven affair that showed flashes of promise. WIDE AWAKE is a smoother, more polished movie with a less porous emotional texture, a better-realized story, and more fully-rounded characters. This is an example of a young film maker taking a step forward with his second film rather than falling victim to the so-called "sophomore jinx."
While it's true that the script for WIDE AWAKE isn't all that ambitious, too often relies on the exposition of an overly-verbose narrator, and includes a few necessary contrivances, what makes the film special are the numerous individual moments that shine. And, although the dialogue is too sophisticated for the way children really talk, it is intelligent enough not to leave us shaking our heads in dismay and disbelief. I left WIDE AWAKE feeling the same way I did after seeing a number of Frank Capra's movies -- I was aware of the problems, but that didn't diminish the warm, fuzzy glow I was experiencing.
Copyright 1998 James Berardinelli
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You either leave them up or you leave them down."
-- David Puttnam
