Cast: Chris Cherot, Chenoa Maxwell, Tammi Jones, Robinne Lee, Reginald James, Hill Harper Director: Chris Cherot Producers: Chris Cherot and Robyn M. Greene Screenplay: Chris Cherot Cinematography: Kerwin DeVonish U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
Despite a host of faults, Chris Cherot's HAV PLENTY is still a likable endeavor. It isn't the most adept feature I've seen recently, but it is energetic, earnest, and (at least at times) endearing. In essence, this is fairly commonplace romantic comedy material punctuated by a few unusual, albeit not terribly unique, stylistic twists. As Cherot reveals in one of the film's late scenes, his goal with HAV PLENTY is not to break new cinematic ground, but to tell a story that is likely to find favor in multiplexes as well as in the art houses that typically show Miramax fare.
The movie's title is a play on the names of the two main characters – Havilland Savage (Chenoa Maxwell) and Lee Plenty (director Cherot). These two are typical mismatched lovers who are destined not to acknowledge their true feelings for each other until the final reel (that's the way it is with 90% of romantic comedies – if you're not comfortable with this, avoid the genre). She's rich, haughty, and cursed with a mercurial temperament. He's broke, humble to the point of self-deprecation, and affable. The "action" starts on December 31 when Havilland, who is dateless after breaking up with an unfaithful fiancé (Hill Harper), invites Lee to make the drive from New York to Washington D.C. to act as her companion for the evening. Also at Haviland's New Year's Eve gathering are her friend, Caroline (Tammi Jones); her sister, Leigh (Robinne Lee); and her brother-in-law, Felix (Reginald James).
Lee's one-night stay in D.C. lengthens into a several-days vacation, and, during the course of his time there, he is hit on by both the unattached Caroline and the newly-married Leigh. Regardless of how attracted he is to the women, Lee rebuffs their advances, arguing that it's not the right occasion. We realize (based on time-honored romantic comedy equations, not to mention the none-too-subtle foreshadowing of the title) that this is all a prelude to some kind of sexual dance between Lee and Havilland.
This is probably the most color-blind of all the black romantic comedies currently available in theaters or on video. Race is almost entirely irrelevant. It would be possible to use white actors in all of the parts with only minimal changes to the script. The result is that, while HAV PLENTY is pleasant enough, it's also generic. Cherot's flourishes (which include Lee speaking directly to the camera and a self-referential version of the movie-within-the-movie, a la SCREAM 2's adaptation of SCREAM) aren't sufficiently daring to give HAV PLENTY an edge.
Obviously put together with more enthusiasm than technique, HAV PLENTY is not a polished production. Many scenes, especially early in the film, are characterized by stilted, unnatural dialogue and strained performances. Lee and Havilland's on-screen meeting, when he arrives in D.C., is especially painful to observe due to bad timing from both actors. Moments like this are sprinkled throughout the movie, interspersed with material on a somewhat higher level. The acting is mostly solid; although there are no standouts, everyone exhibits a grasp of the individual they're playing. Tammi Jones' Caroline occasionally got on my nerves, but that was more the character than the actress.
HAV PLENTY opens with a caption assuring us that this is a true story. I don't know whether that's a sincere statement or not, and it shouldn't affect anyone's enjoyment of the film, but this seems more like a fantasy than real life. There are some nice touches that keep the movie from becoming stale (such as a scene where Havilland playfully rummages through Lee's traveling bag while trying on his boots), but, ultimately, this is pretty familiar stuff – diverting, but not exceptional. However, for those who aren't too demanding about what they see, the slim plenty offered by this picture is probably enough.
Copyright 1998 James Berardinelli
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You either leave them up or you leave them down."
-- David Puttnam
