Date Released: 5/7/93 Running Length: 2:00 Rated: PG-13 (Violence, sex, language)
Starring: Jason Scott Lee, Lauren Holly, Robert Wagner, Michael Learned Director: Rob Cohen Producer: Raffella de Laurentiis Screenplay: Edward Khmara, John Raffo, and Rob Cohen Music: Randy Edelman Released by Universal Pictures
DRAGON is less a strict recounting of the life of Bruce Lee (played by Jason Scott Lee--no relation) than it is a tribute to him. Based on the book BRUCE LEE, THE MAN ONLY I KNEW by Linda Lee, this film tells the story of an icon. Since Bruce is regarded as a hero by this picture, how much we actually get to learn about him is uncertain. At any rate, the film follows his life quickly through childhood, then begins a more detailed account of events as Bruce heads for America. DRAGON ends shortly before the title character's death, leaving one of the most talked-about aspect of his existence unexplored. Perhaps it's better that way.
There's no doubt that, even more than Danny DeVito's HOFFA, this picture was devised to show Bruce Lee in the most positive light possible. He is larger than life throughout the film, whether he is fighting human foes or the demon that stalks his nightmares. DRAGON captures the energy and exuberance of Bruce Lee, but it fails to give more than an incomplete picture of the man behind the personae. In that way, it is unlike HOFFA, CHAPLIN, or MALCOLM X, three other recent, high-profile screen biographies that attempt to present a more balanced portrait.
The Kung Fu fights, well-choreographed and obviously overdone, are executed in the same unforgettable way that similar scenes were done in Lee's own movies. In addition to being a homage to the late actor, they're fun to watch, and add an element of action to what otherwise would have been straight melodrama.
Dramatically, there isn't a whole lot of substance to DRAGON. It isn't going to make anyone cry with its power of human insight. There are some nice scenes--especially those early in the relationship of Bruce and Linda (Lauren Holly). Also present is a subtle-but-forceful point about racism in 1960s Hollywood (as Lee is refused the chance to play the lead character in the series KUNG FU, which he helped develop).
Jason Scott Lee is a good choice to play Lee. The physical resemblance may not be perfect, but Jason matches Bruce for energy and screen presence. His acting is not superior--there are two scenes (one in the hospital after Bruce is seriously injured in a fight and another in Hong Kong when his wife tells him she's taking the children back to America) that are horribly overacted--but Jason has charisma and that covers for a great many faults.
An eerie dimension has been added to this picture by the tragic March death of Brandon Lee, Bruce's only son. It shifts the focus of Bruce's climactic battle with the demon, in which he fights to save not himself, but his son. An unexpected level of poignancy has been added to this--and other--scenes by a cruel twist of fate that the producers could not have foreseen. The movie is dedicated to Brandon.
DRAGON is a fun experience, but far from a great film, and those expecting a probing examination of Bruce Lee's life are likely to be disappointed. Still, as a celebration of the first international Chinese-American movie star, the movie keeps the audience interested and entertained for its full running time, which is not an insignificant feat.
