Date Released: 6/18/93 Running Length: 1:53 Rated: PG-13 (Mature themes, language)
Starring: Kathleen Turner, Tommy Lee Jones, Asha Menina, Park Overall Director: Michael Lessac Producers: Dale Pollock, L. Holfong, and Wolfgang Glattis Screenplay: Michael Lessac Music: James Horner Released by Penta Pictures
While in Mexico, Ruth (Kathleen Turner) and her family suffer a devastating loss when her husband Alex is killed in an accident. Some time later, after being away for years, they return to their North Carolina home with the hope of starting anew. Shortly after coming back and for no apparent reason, Ruth's six-year old daughter Sally (Asha Menina) withdraws from reality. Although fluent in three languages, Sally refuses to speak in any of them, nor will she acknowledge the presence of her mother. However, she develops an affinity for high places and after she nearly kills herself climbing in a building construction site, the court places her in the custody of Dr. Jacob Beerlander (Tommy Lee Jones), a psychiatrist who's an expert in dealing with dissociated children.
I have the feeling that people will either love or hate this movie. Its success depends entirely upon the emotional reaction of the audience. It delivers a powerful punch, but the logic of the plot is uncertain and there are a lot (too many for my taste) of things left unexplained. Writer/director Michael Lessac has taken a few liberties with reality, occasionally stretching things beyond the bounds of credibility.
I'll admit to being touched by HOUSE OF CARDS, but even as the movie worked its skillful manipulation on my emotions, it confounded my intelligence with a storyline that doesn't seem well thought out. It's difficult to talk about specifics without giving things away, but suffice it to say that every time the movie got me completely immersed in its peculiar brand of magic, the script did something inconceivable that left me feeling unsatisfied.
The acting in HOUSE OF CARDS ranges from passable to excellent. Kathleen Turner is good as the widowed Ruth. The character is occasionally difficult to watch, but that's more because of the emotions churning within Ruth than because of a flaw in Ms. Turner's performance. Tommy Lee Jones is perhaps too restrained as Jacob Beerlander, and certainly never sympathetic. Asha Menina, on the other hand, gives a memorable performance, clearly outacting all the adults.
One of the most interesting--and believable--scenes in this film occurs in Dr. Beerlander's school for children as kids with various problems are introduced to Ruth. Unlike much of the rest of the film, this part is not manipulative, but is nevertheless moving, principally because it seems so real.
The greatest fault with HOUSE OF CARDS is that too little of it is believable. In attempting to play on the audience's emotions as well as create an almost-mystical atmosphere, this movie has allowed too many difficult-to-accept contrivances seep into the plot. Given the potential power of the script, this annoyed me, in addition to presenting an unwanted distraction. I wish I could give a wholehearted recommendation, but the best I can do is give one with qualifications. Undoubtedly, there is an audience for this film, but I think it's a small one.
I'll reiterate what I said at the beginning of this review. Most viewers will probably either love the film or hate it. Those that can completely suspend their disbelief and allow the emotional tide of HOUSE OF CARDS to carry them away (as it did in Houston, where this movie won top honors at that city's film festival), will love this picture. Everyone else will find it slow-moving and hard to accept. Oddly enough, I find myself somewhere in the middle, having found some enjoyment in HOUSE OF CARDS, but wishing for a lot more.
