Starring: Thomas Ian Griffith, Lance Henriksen, James Earl Jones, Charlotte Lewis, Tony Todd Director: Jon Hess Producers: Thomas Ian Griffith and Erwin Stoff Screenplay: Thomas Ian Griffith Music: Charles Bernstein Released by New Line Cinema
Terry McCain (Thomas Ian Griffith) is a cop who doesn't mind using excessive force to get his man, and when two police friends are killed in a dispute with a drug kingpin (Burt Young), McCain will stop at nothing to get his revenge. Soon, however, it becomes apparent that someone on the force is in league with the criminals, and that the lives of both McCain and his girlfriend Anna (Charlotte Lewis) are in danger.
A detailed review of EXCESSIVE FORCE seems unnecessary. This film is made for a specific audience. Those who like these kinds of movies--festivals of mindless violence--will see Thomas Ian Griffith's film, while those who aren't fond of the genre will stay away. Little that I say here is likely to make any difference to anyone, but since I sat through this ninety- minute travesty, I intend to express my opinion.
As is usually the case with low-budget action films, the plot is virtually nonexistent--a nonsensical affectation upon which the scenes of kick-boxing and shooting can be hung. For EXCESSIVE FORCE, no attempt is made to simulate reality in the story. There is no possible way that any genuine police department could be run with this degree of ineptitude and corruption.
There's plenty of action and blood, but not much excitement. Good films of this genre are rousing. This one is simply dull. Never do we believe that the hero is in any danger. This creates a sense of inevitability, draining most of the fight sequences of vital energy.
Thomas Ian Griffith, despite bulging biceps and an impressive physique, has little to boast about. His acting isn't any better than Steven Seagal's and he lacks anything resembling charisma. Frankly, I didn't care what happened to his character, as long as it happened quickly so I could get out of the theater. Someone is trying to make Griffith into the next martial arts star, but I don't buy it.
James Earl Jones makes a few appearances as Jake, the owner of the bar above which McCain lives. This role is superfluous and obviously included in an attempt to give EXCESSIVE FORCE credibility through the use of a "big name". It doesn't work. Fortunately, Jones' reputation is solid enough that this shouldn't blemish it. I hope he got paid well.
In the past, I have been known (upon occasion) to enjoy mindless action films. EXCESSIVE FORCE doesn't fall into that group. Simply put, this is a bad movie and should be treated as such by anyone considering viewing it, whether they enjoy the genre or not. It's a decidedly unpleasant experience.
