Starring: Pauly Shore, Carla Gugino, Lane Smith, Cindy Pickett, Mason Adams, Dan Gauthier Director: Steve Rash Producers: Michael Rotenberg and Peter M. Lenkov Screenplay: Fax Bahr, Adam Small, and Shawn Schepps based on a story by Patrick J. Clifton, Susan McMartin, and Peter M. Lenkov Music: Richard Gibbs Released by Hollywood Pictures
Following graduation from a small school in Midwestern America, Rebecca Warner (Carla Gugino) opts for a change. Instead of sticking close to home, she wants to go to college in Southern California. Although her father Walter (Lane Smith) and mother Connie (Cindy Pickett) are uncertain about the idea, they agree that it's Becca's life, and make the two-day drive to her new school. There they encounter her Residential Advisor, Crawl (Pauly Shore). The next time the Warners meet Crawl, it's when he comes home for Thanksgiving with Rebecca. The person who gets off the plane isn't the same shy, reserved girl that left three months ago, but her change in attitude and appearance isn't the only surprise she has in store for her family. In order to get out of marrying an old boyfriend (Dan Gauthier), she pretends to be engaged to Crawl.
Some people like Pauly Shore (mostly teenagers, I suspect). After all, if those people didn't exist, SON-IN-LAW would have never been made. Clearly, the role of Crawl was scripted specifically for him. Oddly enough, with someone marginally less annoying, this could have been a somewhat charming, albeit predictable, film. But to put Shore in a romantic comedy is asking for trouble.
There are times when it almost works, but most of those occasions are when he abandons his stupid stage personae and does something that approaches acting. Unfortunately, there are too few of those moments and, as soon as they pass, the aggravating side of Mr. Shore quickly re-surfaces. There are times when it becomes exceptionally difficult to accept--not to mention like--the character of Crawl.
The film has its humorous scenes, but these are formula-driven and lacking in originality. Perhaps the most inventive moment of SON-IN-LAW comes as the result of a cameo by Brenden Frasier, reprising the role he played in last summer's dud, ENCINO MAN. It says something about the rest of this film to site that as one of SON-IN-LAW's highlights.
The plot is stock romantic comedy material, complete with the usual misunderstandings, break-ups, and resolutions. The ending of SON-IN-LAW is so sickeningly sweet that I almost went into sugar shock. This gives an entirely new meaning to the term "happy ending." Blech. I'm not against happy endings in general, but this kind of sappiness is impossible to stomach.
Carla Gugino, who has the somewhat thankless role of Rebecca, does a fine job with the material she's been given. In many ways, she reminds me of Kimberly Williams (Steve Martin's daughter in the remake of FATHER OF THE BRIDE). Both have a certain freshness that's enjoyable to watch. This is especially true of Gugino in this film, where she mercifully gives us a stable counterbalance to Shore's idiotic antics.
Since SON-IN-LAW takes place on a farm, there exists the usual run of city-boy-out-of-his-element gags. Of course, there's a cow milking scene, and Shore gets to feed the pigs, pluck a turkey, and try his hand at fishing. It's all pretty routine stuff. The few laughs garnered by this line of tried-and-true humor aren't worth sitting through ninety-five minutes of lame drivel.
SON-IN-LAW is a singularly unexceptional comedy, the content of which is well-represented by the theater trailers and TV ads. It's perfect fare for watching on cable, but not worth the time or effort of making a trip to a theater. Those who can't stand Pauly Shore would do well to stay away, and those that love him will go regardless of what I say. So, for those who don't care one way or another, be aware that SON-IN-LAW gives exactly what you expect: a dumb, predictable romantic comedy that has more animals than laughs.
