Starring: John D. LeMay, Kari Keegan, Erin Gray, Steven Williams Director: Adam Marcus Producer: Sean S. Cunningham Screenplay: Dean Lorey and Jay Hugely, based on the story by Hugely and Adam Marcus Music: Harry Manfredini Released by New Line Cinema
This may be a first: a movie title that gives away the ending of the film. Come to think of it, some of the other FRIDAY THE 13TH films did the same thing, didn't they? Actually, they lied. Any bets about this one?
It's the dark of the night at Camp Crystal Lake and some stupid girl who didn't watch any of the other FRIDAY THE 13TH movies is taking her clothes off. What better (and more obvious) prelude to the arrival of Jason for his ninth resurrection. After failing to skewer or behead his victim on the first try, he chases her through the woods before finally cornering her in an apparently empty clearing. Oops. Jason has made a mistake. His prey is actually a plant (not of the flowering variety, although the performance is a bit wooden) and he's suddenly surrounded by military-type men with all kinds of firepower. Fourth of July! It doesn't take long before the killer is a mound of burnt up organs. It looks like it's all over. That is, until the coroner takes too close a look at Jason's oversized heart. Now you and I both know that was a dumb move.
Surprise, surprise! This film will not make my bottom ten list of the year. In fact, it won't come close. Despite a legacy of horrible previous efforts under the FRIDAY THE 13TH umbrella (of which I have seen only three--parts 1, 2, and 8--all on cable), this film actually has a few good elements buried amidst all the dead bodies, dumb dialogue, and mystical nonsense. Chief among these is that JASON GOES TO HELL has chosen to turn the series in the direction of open self-parody.
This movie doesn't take itself seriously--at least not too seriously. In between the various maimings, it takes time out to poke fun at the series' reputation, including a reference to going up to Camp Crystal Lake to "do drugs, have premarital sex, and get slaughtered". It's this warped sense of humor that actually makes the film somewhat entertaining. In a genre where it's often difficult to tell satires from serious attempts, the parodies in JASON GOES TO HELL are far too obvious to be accidental.
Of course, horror fans won't be disappointed. There are the requisite jump-out-of-your-seat-scares (complete with a burst of over-the-top music), not to mention a high body count. Actually, in terms of showing the gruesome deeds, JASON GOES TO HELL is pretty tame. Sure, there are a lot of shots of organs and blood, but most of the murders happen off screen. You know how the people are slaughtered, but you aren't subjected to watching the details.
In the end, Jason gets his--again. But is he really dead this time? Despite the assertion that if he's skewered by one of his relatives, he's finally gone, I somehow doubt that. Unless this film runs a serious financial deficit--which seems unlikely given the opening weekend turnout--Jason will be back. In fact, we're even given a substantial clue about his next cinematic adventure.
After the disappointing lack of success of FRIDAY THE 13TH PART EIGHT, Paramount Pictures, the previous distributor of these films, gave up on the series. New Line Cinema quickly snatched up the rights. The executives had a great idea for a crossover now that they owned Jason and Freddy Krueger. My question is, why not try to get Michael Meyers (the killer from the HALLOWEEN series, not the guy who should be axed for foisting SO I MARRIED AN AXE MURDERER on us)? Then there could be a real gathering of the Who's Who of Maniacs. As of now, however, clues point to it being just Jason and Freddy. Oh well.
Make no mistake from any slight praise that I might give this film--it is in no way a good movie. Seeing it with the right rowdy audience while not spending money on it (if I hadn't gotten in for free, I wouldn't have seen this film) makes Jason's latest apparition bearable. For anyone who is even luke-warm about this genre, don't take this as a recommendation to see the film. But for blood-and-guts lovers everywhere, the return of Jason is reason enough to trundle down to the local multiplex for a midnight showing. After all, you wouldn't dare consider seeing this movie during the day!
