Date Re-released: 8/27/93 (Original release 1961) Running Length: 3:04 (3:12 including 8-minute intermission) Rated: NR (Violence)
Starring: Charlton Heston, Sofia Loren, John Fraser, Genevieve Page, Herbert Lom Director: Anthony Mann Producer: Samuel Bronston Screenplay: Frederic M. Frank and Philip Yordan Music: Miklos Rozsa Re-released by Miramax Films and Martin Scorsese
"EL CID is one of the greatest epic films ever made. Anthony Mann's sense of composition, his use of space, and his graceful camera movements bring to life an ancient tapestry where the transformation of an ordinary man into a legend become almost a mystical experience." Lavish praise from Martin Scorsese, one of the forces behind the restoration and re-release of EL CID. Pardon me if I am not wholly in agreement with him.
The story of EL CID centers around the life of Rodrigo Diaz (Charlton Heston), a Castilian knight in 1060 Spain fighting to keep his country from the brink of civil war so that it will retain the manpower and unity necessary to defend itself against the outside threat of the North African Moors. Diaz, called El Cid by his followers, becomes a living legend to the men of eleventh century Spain, and this film willingly expands upon every myth to surround the name of the legitimate historical figure. EL CID is definitely not a good source for a factual biography (the identity of Diaz' wife and the premise of the finale are a few of the more obvious occasions when the truth is completely ignored).
Using similar methods and equal care to that which was given to LAWRENCE OF ARABIA, the restoration of EL CID is an impressive undertaking. The sound quality on this new print is flawless and, for the most part, the picture is better than one would expect from a thirty-two year old film. There are several frames that are far from mint condition, but the overall effect is impressive, and the colors are never washed-out.
The battle scenes of EL CID are breathtaking, and well worth the effort of seeing on a large screen. Video viewing of the climactic struggle would greatly diminish the impact, and it is in this context that it's possible to understand Scorsese's quote. This is definitely a film meant for theaters. The television screen will serve only to limit the high points and magnify the numerous, often-glaring weaknesses. Instead of EL CID seeming like an epic, it could come off looking rather stupid.
That's because beyond the spectacle and pageantry, EL CID's virtues are limited. The costumes and set design are as impressive as the magnificent backdrops against which the turbulent struggles of the armies occur, and the effort necessary to orchestrate the realistic clash of thousands of swords is mind-boggling, but while these things add a great deal to the film, they cannot entirely cover up its shortcomings.
Acting is by far the biggest problem. While both Charlton Heston and Sofia Loren have imposing screen personalities, neither is capable of projecting real emotion or drawing us into a rapport with the characters. Simply put, Heston and Loren are wooden, and there are only a few occasions on which they manage to make Diaz or Chimene real. The chemistry between them is flat, conveying little, if any, passion. "Smouldering" is not a word anyone would use to describe this couple.
The plot is high melodrama with few surprises. Diaz is the hero, and he does all the superhuman things expected from a knight "with God on [his] side." EL CID turns far more often to the ridiculous than the sublime, and the last scenes contain an element that is downright silly. Perhaps if the movie didn't take itself so seriously, there wouldn't be as many opportunities for unintentional laughter, but EL CID is about as self-important as a motion picture can be. It is an epic, after all, but in case we've forgotten, there's always the needlessly florid dialogue and stentorian score to remind us.
Obviously, they don't make movies like this any more, and that's both good and bad. While there's a lot in this film that modern pictures don't need to harken back to, it would be nice to see some of the flair. When recalling great battles in recent films, only a few come to mind (LAST OF THE MOHICANS and GLORY, for example), none of which have the scope or sheer power of what Anthony Mann achieved in EL CID.
So, while I'm personally not ready to anoint EL CID as the timeless epic classic that it has become, I'll not pepper it with arrows of disdain, either. This is a grand movie with tremendous aspirations that are not always realized. Nevertheless, it's an entertaining, if not transcendental way to spend three-plus hours.
