ESU's football program is in trouble. After two disappointing seasons not making a bowl game, the job of Coach Winters (James Caan) is on the line. 1993 gives him a talented team loaded with problem players. His star quarterback, Joe Kane (Craig Sheffer), is a Heisman Trophy candidate, but has self-destructive impulses that could end his life. Freshman running back Darnell Jefferson has speed, but little academic ability, and is unable to pass the competency tests. Then there's a defensive back who takes steroids and tries to date rape a girl, and another player who gets caught having someone else take an exam for him (that "someone" just happens to be Coach Winters' daughter).
THE PROGRAM is a real mish-mash of cliches. It takes a little from every sports drama that's out there, adds a dash of controversy gleaned from local headlines, and churns them all together. The result, while possibly passably entertaining for football aficionados, isn't going to be hailed as great drama. There's far too little in this movie that doesn't feel artificial.
We've seen all these characters before. Most of their problems are wrapped up in nice, neat packages by the final act, and those that aren't fail to generate much sympathy. In general, we don't feel much about these football players--arrogance appears to be their chief trait, and it isn't an endearing one. Sometimes it's nice to see them slip up, just to get a moment's worth of humility.
Writer/director David S. Ward tries for three-dimensional characters, but ends up with regurgitated types. The jocks are little kids in big bodies with a bunch of typical problems, and the girlfriends are little more than token roles added because college football players are supposed to have good-looking female companions. Most surprising of all is Coach Winters, who has about as much personality as a tree. HOOSIERS worked because Gene Hackman's basketball coach was a dynamic individual. One of THE PROGRAM's greatest faults is that it develops Winters so poorly.
The on-field side of things is more interesting. Of course, we know what's going to happen in the big game, and it all goes according to expectations, so there's little suspense, but the filming and staging of the games is done with undeniable flair and proficiency. These have the look and feel of real football contests, and we get an undiluted sense of some of the antics that go on between players as they face each other at the line of scrimmage.
THE PROGRAM is far too loud, with an unnecessarily harsh musical score intruding even on scenes that are meant to be quietly dramatic. It's obvious that composer Michael Colombier doesn't know the meaning of the word "subtle". There are times when his blaring notes easily drown out the noise of a crowd of over fifty thousand.
James Caan is horribly miscast as Coach Winters, and his performance is about as flat as they come. Craig Sheffer and Omar Epps do much better jobs with their characters, but the writing limits them. Halle Berry is perhaps THE PROGRAM's most underutilized strength. She's the best thing in the picture, but has little to do, and certainly nothing that stretches her abilities. Likewise, Kristy Swanson (sporting black hair) has a rather thankless role.
THE PROGRAM has its high points, but there are too few of them, and I suspect that many of the film's "insider's touches" are a combination of fact and fiction. Principally, this a formula football movie. Although lacking the extra dimensions of films such as HOOSIERS (basketball) and THE NATURAL (baseball), THE PROGRAM still delivers the surge of adrenaline that fans of this sport will expect. Those hoping to see a hard-hitting drama about life off the field should prepare to be inundated by a load of feeble, unimaginative material that it's almost impossible to take seriously.
