Date Released: 10/15/93 Running Length: 1:39 Rated: PG-13 (Mature themes, language, sexual situations)
Starring: Matt Dillon, Anabella Sciorra, Mary Louise Parker, William Hurt Director: Anthony Minghella Producer: Marianne Moloney Screenplay: Amy Schor and Vicki Polon Music: Michael Gore Released by The Samuel Goldwyn Company through Warner Brothers
It's very difficult to do a romantic comedy right. Because the outcome is almost never in doubt, the plot becomes little more than a conveyance - a means to an end. As a result, no matter how strong the storyline is, there are limits to its effectiveness. Successful romantic comedies work because of solid performances by the actors; well-rounded, developing characters for them to play; and that certain je ne sais quoi (often referred to as "chemistry") which allows the audience to believe, however momentarily, that these two people are actually in love. Happily for those who enjoy these sorts of movies, MR. WONDERFUL meets the criteria.
Once upon a time, Gus (Matt Dillon) and Lee (Anabella Sciorra) were happily married, but that was before a separation, a court settlement, and alimony. Now, Gus wants to enter a business venture with four close friends, but he can't find the funds because the terms of the divorce stipulates that he has to put his ex-wife through college. The only solution he can see (and even he acknowledges it to be a long-shot) is to get her married again so he no longer has to pay the alimony. Lee, however, is involved with a married professor (William Hurt), and that makes Gus' job all the more difficult. Adding to his problems is a certain instability in his own life - his girlfriend Rita (Mary Louise Parker) wants to move in with him, but Gus is experiencing difficulty making a commitment. Of course, what's obvious to the audience from the beginning, but takes the characters much longer to figure out, is that the pair who split up still love each other.
MR. WONDERFUL is a generally well-written, mostly intelligent romance that's more of a light drama than a comedy. Most of the silly cliches and ridiculous plot elements that clutter up most entries of the genre are absent. Instead of the story forcing the characters into silly situations created solely to spark laughter, this movie tries hard to place Gus and Lee in believable circumstances that allow their personalities to come out. Because, as the writers and director Anthony Minghella (who made TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY) obviously realize, for this type of movie to work, it's necessary for the audience to care about the people on screen.
And we do care. Not only about the principals, but about some of the minor characters as well. While the script clearly shortchanges William Hurt's Tom, reducing him to a philandering husband having an affair with a student, Mary Louise Parker's Rita is developed more fully. The actress is excellent in tragic roles (she played much the same sort of person in GRAND CANYON), and many of her scenes contain an element of pathos. There are times when the viewer sympathizes far more with Rita than with either Gus or Lee. Throughout much of MR. WONDERFUL, she seems the victim.
Manipulation, another staple of the genre, is kept to a minimum. It's present, as is requisite with this type of movie, but Minghella keeps things low-key. There are several opportunities left unused that another script might have shamelessly plundered to tweak the viewer's emotions.
At first, the choice of Matt Dillon and Anabella Sciorra might seem an odd one, but the two work well together. Their chemistry is not sexually-charged, and it's clear that there's something beyond the physical between them. They connect, which is not the case for Gus and Rita , and Lee and Tom.
MR. WONDERFUL does the little things right, which is also important. Although highly symbolic, when electricity is used in a literal sense (Gus works for New York City's Con Edison power company), the technical details are in order. There are also a number of small scenes that, taken on their own merit, work very well (the meeting between "Funny Face" and "Mr. Wonderful", the charity auction, Gus' breaking his wedding dishes to prove his love for Rita).
The things that are wrong with MR. WONDERFUL are the same things that are wrong with just about every other movie of its kind - it's sentimental and occasionally silly, but as a romance, it's rock solid. MR. WONDERFUL doesn't aspire to anything more than it is, and such a simple, uncomplicated presentation, coupled with generally-likable and believable characters, makes this film a fine piece of entertainment.
