When I was a child, one of the reasons I enjoyed the Christmas season so much was because of the annual arrival of those endlessly-repeated television specials: RUDOLPH THE RED-NOSED REINDEER, SANTA CLAUS IS COMING TO TOWN, THE YEAR WITHOUT A SANTA CLAUS. Tim Burton must remember those programs too, because in his own inimitable way, he has paid homage to them in this most twisted of holiday fairy tales, THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS.
The scene is Halloween Town where, not surprisingly, October 31 is the biggest night of the year. However, after arranging and carrying out his most devilish Halloween yet, Jack Skellington (voiced by Chris Sarandon when speaking, Danny Elfman when singing) is suffering the post-holiday blues. He craves something different in his life, something that can't be found in Halloween Town. Wandering out in a forest, he discovers gateways to different holidays, and finds his way to Christmas Town. There, he is captivated by the lights, the festivity, and the joy. He returns home to tell everyone that this year, Halloween Town is going to celebrate Christmas. To make things complete, he, Jack Skellington, will replace "Sandy Claws" on his yearly December 31 ride, delivering presents and spreading good cheer. Everyone is enthused by the idea except Sally (voiced by Catherine O'Hara), who has a premonition of doom if Jack goes through with his plans.
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS is a visual splendor. Done on the cheap, this could have been a gimmicky, unsatisfying motion picture, but considering the obvious time and effort put into constructing the movie, it is an unqualified success. Everything moves smoothly and naturally, and the attention to detail is exquisite. We are given a clever cast of characters that look like something from Edward Gorey's sketchbook in a setting that oozes atmosphere. It is not difficult at all to become wrapped up in this movie.
The film is designed to be suitable for all but the youngest children, some of whom might be frightened by any of the bizarre inhabitants of Halloween Town (you know your childrens' natures and whether animated ghouls and goblins will terrify them or not). On its surface, the story has little more complexity than THE YEAR WITHOUT A SANTA CLAUS, so younger viewers will be able to enjoy the movie without feeling lost or bored. However, as is too rarely the case with family films, there is another level to this film. Much of the wryest humor is designed for adults.
Even those who aren't taken in by the charming-yet-simple story or the likable characters, will be enthralled by the world Tim Burton and director Henry Selick have created. It is, quite frankly, an amazing achievement, and one that we are not likely to see repeated for a long time.
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS is HOW THE GRINCH STOLE CHRISTMAS thrown into reverse (although clearly the Dr. Seuss tale had a part in formulating some of the images of Christmas Town). While the Grinch made Christmas better by trying to destroy it, Jack Skellington ruins the holiday by trying to improve it. But don't worry - everything turns out all right in the end. This is, remember, a family film.
The biggest failing of THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS, and it shouldn't be overlooked, is the weakness of Danny Elfman's songs. With the exception of one or two, these are uniformly lifeless, and there are times when the movie might have been better without them. Something a little more energetic is called for. Elfman's score is more than adequate, but the songs are lacking.
Caroline Thompson, Tim Burton, and Danny Elfman have worked together before, and they appear have a good rapport when it comes to the unusual (the trio were all involved in EDWARD SCISSORHANDS). Each of them has invested a part of themselves in THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS, even as has Henry Selick, coordinator of the stop-motion animation.
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS has something to offer just about everyone. For the kids, it's a fantasy celebrating two holidays. For the adults, it's an opportunity to experience some light entertainment while marvelling at how adept Hollywood has become at these techniques. There are songs (even if they aren't nearly as noteworthy as they should be), laughs, and a little romance. In short, THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS does what it intends to do: entertain.
