Starring: Anthony Hopkins, Emma Thompson, James Fox, Christopher Reeve Director: James Ivory Producers: Mike Nichols, John Calley, and Ismail Merchant Screenplay: Ruth Prawer Jhabvala based on the novel by Kazuo Ishiguro Music: Richard Robbins Released by Columbia Pictures
The cream always rises to the top, and such is the indisputable case with Anthony Hopkins' deeply moving portrayal of the stilted butler of Darlington Hall in the newest offering from Merchant Ivory. Reuniting HOWARDS END co-stars Hopkins and Emma Thompson, this offering is at once both better and not as impressive as last year's best picture contender. Few will deny, however, that this is a movie well worth a trip to a theater.
Most of THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is told as a series of flashbacks, with a 1950s James Stevens (Anthony Hopkins) recalling his days of service under the late Lord Darlington (James Fox), especially during the years leading up to the second world war. Of special note is Stevens' never-defined relationship with the head housekeeper, Sally Kenton (Emma Thompson). They loved each other, but that love remained unvoiced, for no matter how hard Miss Kenton tried to draw him out, Mr. Stevens could not admit his feelings, not even to himself.
The relationship between the two principals is played out under the shadow of the Nazis' rise to power in Germany. Lord Darlington, a German sympathizer who believes that the Treaty of Versailles was cruelly unfair, is determined to fight for peace, no matter what the cost. Some of those that he invites to stay under his roof are not as enthusiastic, including U. S. Congressman Lewis (Christopher Reeve), a man who warns Darlington that he is an amateur playing at a game best left to professionals. The warning is prophetic, but its consequences are not explored as fully as they might have been.
Nevertheless, we care far more about the interaction between Miss Kenton and Mr. Stevens than we do Lord Darlington's attempts to curtail war. We follow these two across more than twenty years, always hoping that something will crack Stevens' perfect veneer of emotional dearth. In the end, it is movie's unwillingness to provide some sort of resolution that keeps the emotional power marginally below than that of a film like THE AGE OF INNOCENCE. Tragedy without catharsis can be a bitter pill for any movie-goer to swallow.
The method of storytelling is also somewhat suspect. By recounting the bulk of events from a time when most of the tale is done, THE REMAINS OF THE DAY creates an expectation of a future occurrence which never happens. While this movie is too good for us to complain about being cheated, it's hard not to acknowledge a sense of incompleteness.
Anthony Hopkins has the central role, and he portrays Stevens to perfection. Having viewed this interpretation, it is unthinkable that anyone could have replaced him. This monumental acting job--surely one of the best of the year, if not the best--is all the more impressive because of the lack of external emotional range in the butler. Mr. Hopkins is forced to employ a great deal of subtlety to bring out the turmoil beneath the surface. That, after all, is the mark of a master.
Revel in the presentation of Stevens, and the complexity of his personality. It's a rare film that successfully creates a character this compelling, fascinating, and real. Despite being such a cold fish, the butler captures our sympathies and holds them, and we find ourselves desperately wishing for the impossible. THE CRYING GAME may have said that a man cannot go against his nature, but THE REMAINS OF THE DAY ruthelessly drives home that truth. Tears will doubtless be shed by some members of the audience, and this film is far more deserving of them than any of numerous manipulative melodramas. Genuine emotional impact--that's the key to the success of THE REMAINS OF THE DAY.
Emma Thompson does her usual good job with her part, but the role of Ms. Kenton lacks the substance of her character in HOWARDS END (and even MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, if you're looking for a comparison from this year). That's not to say that Ms. Thompson has been saddled with a featherweight; nothing could be further from the truth. But this is Stevens' story, and ultimately Sally Kenton enjoys no more than a supporting role.
Most disappointing of all the characters is that of James Fox's Darlington. We're constantly told how "good" and "noble" Darlington is, but rarely shown more than glimpses of the inner man. He remains an icon, and the inability or unwillingness of THE REMAINS OF THE DAY to humanize him impacts on how we view everyone else. It is, for example, more difficult to understand Stevens' unquestioning devotion to his employer.
Christopher Reeve is a perfect choice to play the "typical American." No one would confuse Congressman Lewis with a real character, but it doesn't seem that James Ivory was interested in presenting more than a stereotype. Lewis is involved for two reasons, and once both aims are accomplished, there's no real reason for him to be in the story at all. He serves his purpose, and that's good enough.
The symbolism is the last scene is best described as cryptic. While almost any interpretation could be considered valid, the overall impression is that the final moments of THE REMAINS OF THE DAY are largely superfluous.
Lest the tone of portions of this review seem too negative, let me reiterate that this is an engaging and powerful motion picture, every bit the rival of HOWARDS END, and perhaps in many ways more emotionally wrenching (this film is probably better paced, as well). Merchant Ivory with flaws is superior to near-perfection from most other producer/director teams, and THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is certainly among the better productions of the year. Tragic love stories often hit home with the hardest impact, and few are better-crafted and more intelligently presented than that of Mr. Stevens and Miss Kenton.
