Starring: John Travolta, Kirstie Alley, Olympia Dukakis, Lysette Anthony, and the voices of Danny DeVito and Diane Keaton Director: Tom Ropelewski Producer: Jonathan D. Krane Screenplay: Tom Ropelewski and Leslie Dixon Music: William Ross Released by TriStar Pictures
It's six years after the first LOOK WHO'S TALKING, and Mikey and his little sister Julie are old enough to speak with their own voices, which means no more wisecracks--at least not from them. This time around, the plot centers on the two dogs adopted by the family: Rocks (voice of Danny DeVito), a toughened street mongrel, and Daphne (voice of Diane Keaton), a pure bred show dog. With Christmas fast approaching, Molly (Kirstie Alley) has lost her job, so her husband James (John Travolta) must work extra hard to impress his new boss Samantha (Lysette Anthony) in order to maintain financial solvency. Little does the unsuspecting James realize that he was hired for more than his ability to pilot airplanes.
In the case of the LOOK WHO'S TALKING films, the third time definitely isn't a charm. There are few enough ideas that can support a sequel, not to mention two, and LOOK WHO'S TALKING isn't among that select group. Yes, the original entry was clever, occasionally funny, and worth a look--at least on video. LOOK WHO'S TALKING TOO, however, was downright awful. Number three in the series isn't worse than its immediate predecessor (thankfully), but it's not better either. My sincere hope is that this flat, lifeless excuse for family entertainment will put an end to these pictures for good.
Once upon a time, John Travolta and Kirstie Alley managed to work well together. Their chemistry was never perfect, but it was good enough to suit a light comedy. Two films later, whatever they once had is gone. If James and Molly are still in love, you can't tell it from the performances. Talk about actors on auto-pilot! The dogs generate more PG-rated heat than these two stiffs.
The entire acting scene isn't bleak, though. Lysette Anthony is suitably vampish as the man-eating mega-corporate exec who sets her sights on James (why she chooses him is a mystery, but I guess there's no accounting for taste). The role isn't much of a challenge, but Ms. Anthony is never boring. Also, little Tabitha Lupien is tremendously cute as Julie, and does a good job outacting everyone older than her.
By now, the one-liners and juvenile humor have become worn out. Even the little kids in the audience didn't appear to be enjoying themselves--and this is aimed at them. The few "adult" double entendres are so obvious that no one who understands them is likely to do more than smirk.
There are two specific moments in this movie worth mentioning. The first is the opening shot--a no-cuts scene of well-choreographed bedtime mass confusion that runs on for about five minutes. The second is an in-joke for those who remember that Ms. Alley originated the role of the half-Vulcan Lt. Saavik in STAR TREK II. Here, donning the pointy ears as one of Santa's helpers, she informs an annoying patron that she's quite willing to demonstrate the "Vulcan death grip."
As you can tell from these "high points," this film is sorely lacking in reasons why anyone of sound mind would want to watch it. Even Charles Barkley's big-screen acting debut can't camouflage a wandering script built on formulas and cliches. As for John Travolta and Kirstie Alley, suffice it to say that their pets steal every scene, and when the dogs aren't present, then the furniture takes the honor. LOOK WHO'S TALKING NOW has about as much appeal as the pile that Rocks leaves on the back seat of James' cab.
