Josh (Jacob Tierney) and his brother Sam (Noah Fleiss) are on the run, but they're not fleeing from circumstances that normally cause kids to leave home. Yes, there's a divorce in the family, Mom is about to re- marry a stuck-up pig, and Dad's stepkids are real jerks, but these are only a small part of the problem. Josh is on the lam because he thinks he killed an abusive drunk (Chris Penn), and Sam is with him because he believes one of his brother's more wildly improbable stories: "S.A.M." is an acronym for Strategically Altered Mutant, and he's about to be sold to the government to participate in a war in Africa. Together, the pair are headed for Canada and freedom.
How much are you willing to suspend your disbelief? In the answer to that question lies the degree to which you'll buy into the underlying premise of JOSH AND S.A.M, and how much you will therefore enjoy it. There are enough nice little touches to keep the mountain of larger implausibilities cleverly camouflaged, but never completely hidden. As a result, while many individual scenes work quite well for either comedic or dramatic value (more of the former than the latter), the film as a whole is lacking.
One of the most curious elements of JOSH AND S.A.M is the inclusion of Martha Plimpton's Alison. Talk about underdeveloped characters and story potential left unearthed... She starts out as a plot device and never develops into much more, which is truly unfortunate considering the rare glimpses that we're given of the person beneath the toughened exterior.
In many ways, this picture follows the time-honored pattern of many so-called "road movies," albeit with protagonists of an unusually young age. Despite being brothers, Josh and Sam start out antagonistic, and only through their various travels and travails do they come to recognize how important each is to the other. Kinship may not be binding, but friendship is--or at least that's what JOSH AND S.A.M would have you believe.
Although the two main characters are kids (ages 12 and 7, respectively), older viewers will get as much, or more, out of JOSH AND S.A.M. than younger ones. Some of the themes, and much of the humor, will escape the pre-teen crowd. Nevertheless, children will appreciate the adventure, so for parents who don't mind a few four-letter words, this is reasonable family entertainment.
Jacob Tierney and Noah Fleiss are excellent child actors. Tierney, the older of the two, has superior emotional range--his quiet, honest reaction in the scene when his step-brothers are calling him a "homo" shows a remarkable grasp of acting skill. Josh's pain is eloquently presented, but the emotion is never overplayed. From beginning to end, it's hard to find an instance where Jacob's work is off-center.
Noah Fleiss, while lacking the subtlety of his on-screen brother, brings an element of energy and verve to his part. Sam doesn't have the depth of Josh, but Fleiss is capable enough to invest him with the humanity necessary to avoid the "caricature trap." It would have been easy for Sam to become the whining little brother, but he's always more than that (in fact, I don't think he ever whines).
On the down side, almost every member of Josh and Sam's family comes across as a one-dimensional stereotype--especially their mother. Played without flair by Joan Allen, this woman has no personality whatsoever. Oddly enough, originally Bebe Neuwirth was hired for the part, but her portrayal was deemed "too unsympathetic." When she was unavailable to re-shoot her scenes, the role was re-cast. If this resulted in an improvement, it's not readily visible.
The movie's greatest asset is its sense of humor. The drama is very much of the hit-and-miss variety, and the adventure element has obvious limitations, but the comedy is fresh and inventive, and provokes several hearty laughs. Adults are often the butt of these jokes, but almost all of them are funny because they're perceptive.
First-time director Billy Weber has a good sense of pacing, and JOSH AND S.A.M. never becomes dull or plodding. This trait isn't unexpected, since Weber's background is in editing. His previous credits include 48 HOURS, BEVERLY HILLS COP, and TOP GUN, for which he earned an Academy Award Nomination.
Perhaps the most curious thing about JOSH AND S.A.M. is the timing of its release. Initially, Castle Rock decided on a mid-August date. This was scrapped by Columbia because of "unfavorable competition," leading to the next choice, which was mid-October. However, for some unfathomable reason, the October 15 opening was pushed back to November 24. Now, coming out amidst a rush of gargantuan holiday films, JOSH AND S.A.M has little chance of being seen by more than a handful of people and, barring something unexpected, will vanish like a raindrop in a pond, only to resurface shortly on video.
JOSH AND S.A.M is capable of supplying a little over an hour and a half's worth of entertainment. Everything doesn't gel together, but there's enough cleverness in the script to allow for a little tolerance. A great movie this isn't, but it has its moments.
