If you didn't have enough of them two years ago, the Addams family is back with a movie that does little more than rehash the same "spirit" and recycle the same jokes. A few sparkling performances and funny moments save this from being a waste of time, but it's not a promising way to start the Thanksgiving/Christmas movie season.
This time around, Morticia (Anjelica Huston) is having a baby. In answer to the inevitable question of whether it's a boy or a girl, Gomez (Raul Julia) responds, "It's an Addams!" However, all is not sunny (or should that be gloomy?) in the household, because neither of the previous Addams children likes their new baby brother, and they spend hours devising ways to get rid of him. Enter Debbie Jelinsky (Joan Cusack), the new nanny, who has a thing for marrying wealthy men then getting rid of them--and now she's set Fester (Christopher Lloyd) in her sights.
Much of what was valid about 1991's THE ADDAMS FAMILY is true of this sequel. In fact, I could just about regurgitate the review for that film in this case. The movies are more than similar, although less than identical, and it's almost guaranteed that those who relished part one will enjoy part two (unless they grow tired of hearing variations on the same one-liners).
Any movie that tries to be funny for an hour and a half is bound to score from time-to-time, and this is true for ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES. There are laughs to be had along the way, but not enough to cover up the obvious lack of plot. This film is a series of cartoons loosely strung together, and too much of the humor is obvious. With a legitimate storyline, ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES might have been great fun, but as it is, it's about twice as long as it needs to be.
Why is it that the most impressive thing about these TV-to-movie transformations seems to be the casting? Not only is this true for THE ADDAMS FAMILY, but THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES showed the same thing. Raul Julia and Anjelica Huston are as perfect as last time. Christopher Lloyd may be a bit annoying as Fester, but he gets the job done. Joan Cusack is wonderfully over-the-top as Debbie the psycho nanny, with her primary functions being to snarl lines and expose cleavage.
Even two years older, the most notable cast member is still Christina Ricci, who turns in a beautifully deadpan performance as Wednesday (and even gets an opportunity to smile). There are times in this movie when she's the only thing worth watching, and she saves the "Wednesday and Pugsley go to summer camp" subplot from turning into an agonizing viewing experience.
Generally speaking, ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES delivers what its viewers expect from it, and that makes it the simplest of films to review. I don't think it's worth a trip to the movies--there's not enough humor or inventiveness for that--but doubtless many will disagree. The box office tally will determine if there's to be a third installment. Of course, it's still open to debate whether the second film was warranted in the first place.
