WILD WEST has nothing to do with the old American frontier. Rather, it is a sort of Pakistani version of THE COMMITMENTS, with the focus of the band being country/western music rather than R&B.
Zaf (Naveen Andrews) is the leader of the Honky Tonk Cowboys, an all- Pakistani country music band that plays wherever it can get a gig in London's Southall district. Away from the stage, Zaf and his brothers (Kay, played by Ronny Jhutti, and Ali, played by Ravi Kapoor) are what the well-respected members of the community call "a wild bunch", getting their kicks from stealing police cars and other sorts of "harmless" mischief. Zaf's soul is his music, however, and he finds new life--and a lead singer--when he meets Rifat (Sarita Choudhury), the abused wife of a West London cabbie.
WILD WEST is a culture clash movie with a twist. This time, it's not Pakistanis trying to fit in with whites, but Pakistanis trying to be accepted as country/western musicians. The film has the good sense to approach this issue--not to mention several others--with a fair dose of humor, so while the point is made, it's accomplished without a sermon. This is a lighthearted romp, not a lugubrious piece of moralizing.
Director David Attwood has managed to infuse his entire film with energy and zest--not only the characters, but the story itself. If the pacing is occasionally erratic, it's because Attwood rarely slows down, and when he does (usually for a moment of straight drama--such as the scenes where Zaf's mother talks to him about going to Pakistan), the audience feels the lull.
Occasionally, the film is a little too obvious. Attwood creates a number of intentional stereotypes, but these don't always work. The "typical American" record producers are an example. As sendups, this pair is a little too annoying (although the biting satire surrounding them fits WILD WEST's mood perfectly). Rifat's abusive husband is another case of a character that never clicks.
WILD WEST never attains the flair of THE COMMITMENTS. In the first place, the music isn't as good or as all-pervasive. Additionally, Attwood's film is never that concerned about burrowing under the characters' skins. WILD WEST isn't shallow, but it glosses over numerous issues to preserve the light tone. This could have easily become a dark, brooding motion picture.
All the performers are likeable. The best known of these, Sarita Choudhury (of MISSISSIPPI MASALA), is the most agreeable on-screen presence. Naveen Andrews shows good range as Zaf, and seems perfectly at home in a cowboy hat and jacket. Ameet Chana, who plays the Honky Tonk Cowboys' manager, gives an occasionally-hilarious over-the-top performance, seizing on every Americanism and cliche he can find.
WILD WEST works because of its reckless spirit. The message about people's intolerance of diversity comes across all the more clearly because it isn't shrouded in long speeches and mournful testimonials. David Attwood has chosen his medium well for WILD WEST to become something with a little more substance than a typical farce.
