Starring: Debra Winger, Gabriel Byrne, Barbara Hershey, David Strathairn, Chloe Webb, John Terry, Laurie Metcalf Director: Stephen Gyllenhall Producer: Naomi Foner Screenplay: Naomi Foner from the novel by Mary McGarry Morris Music: Carter Burwell Released by Amblin Entertainment through Gramercy Pictures
Martha (Debra Winger) is a child in an adult's body. Mentally and emotionally disabled, she clings to people and things like a parasite, and has clear notions of what's right and what's wrong. Unable to survive without supervision, she lives with her widowed aunt, Frances (Barbara Hershey), a wealthy woman who's carrying on an affair with the assemblyman she's trying to get re-elected (John Terry). One day, after the assemblyman's wife (Laurie Metcalf) drives her car through Frances' porch (she's annoyed at her husband's indiscretion), a little carpentry work is needed. Enter Mackey (Gabriel Byrne), a drunken drifter with a talent for wood who develops an attraction for Martha.
A DANGEROUS WOMAN is a bleak, dreary drama about the tragic life of a woman with severe mental and emotional handicaps. In its present form, this is one of the least appealing movies of the year. It's not especially poorly made, but neither is it a masterpiece of modern film making. A DANGEROUS WOMAN has little to hold the viewer's interest, and its tone is so relentlessly downbeat that, at times, it becomes unpleasant to watch.
Perhaps the biggest flaw is characterization. I never cared about any of the three principals (Martha, Mackey, and Frances). None of them felt real; consequently, their fates were of little concern. For the most part, these people are dull and uninteresting, and it's a major mistake to build a motion picture around them. Martha is especially disappointing. She rings false not because of her limitations, but because of the manner in which those limitations are presented. Everything about them is too obvious (no subtlety).
The script is more at fault than the actors. Barbara Hershey and Gabriel Byre don't excel here, but their performances aren't without their moments. Debra Winger has a tendency to go overboard in her portrayal of Martha, making Mercedes Ruehl's Bella from LOST IN YONKERS seem understated by comparison. Some will probably be astounded by this example of overacting. Personally, I think Ms. Winger would have been much more impressive had she applied some restraint. After the first few minutes, she becomes annoying.
The tone and pacing of A DANGEROUS WOMAN are also problematic. The movie moves along sloooooowly, apparently going nowhere. When something actually happens, it's a surprise, but even the "big" events fail to generate much energy. The infrequent attempts at humor are bleak and unfunny, and a few "cute" scenes with Martha generate almost no emotional response from the audience.
There is also a huge missed opportunity. A DANGEROUS WOMAN has a chance to examine the issue of rape from an unusual perspective. Down this avenue lies the path of a potentially potent drama, but just as the film seems to be headed in the right direction, it takes a detour, and never gets back on track. All we're treated to after that is a mind-numbingly silly conclusion where suddenly everything is bright and glorious.
Somewhere in A DANGEROUS WOMAN lies an interesting story. The problem is, it's buried under too many layers of dross for more than a few hints of it to bubble to the surface. Production-wise, there have been many movies of far worse quality, but there are few that match this one for lack of entertainment value.
