Starring: Mike Myers, Dana Carvey, Christopher Walken, Tia Carrere Director: Stephen Surjik Producer: Lorne Michaels Screenplay: Mike Myers, Bonnie Turner, and Terry Turner Music: Carter Burwell and various artists Released by Paramount Pictures
The original WAYNE'S WORLD boasted a number of clever bits and parodies glued together by a silly plotline, but at least it was something a new, and a little different. WAYNE'S WORLD 2 boasts far fewer clever bits and parodies glued together by a nonsensical plotline, and there's absolutely nothing remotely new or different about this sequel. It isn't appalling, but it's not worth a trip to the theaters, either.
A year has passed since the last cinematic recounting of the adventures of Wayne (Mike Myers) and Garth (Dana Carvey), the intrepid duo from the SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE skits. Now, the two middle-aged post-teenagers have moved out of their parents' houses and into an abandoned doll factory. Neither has any idea what to do with his life, but Wayne's search begins through a dream-meeting with Jim Morrison. Our slumbering hero is told to organize a concert in Aurora, Illinois, and get as many acts as he can. "If you book them, they will come," promises Morrison. So, with Garth's help, Wayne gets to work setting things up.
There are some worthwhile moments in WAYNE'S WORLD 2, but not enough to justify the filming of a movie. In the humorous parodies category are a lampooning of Hong Kong chop-socky films, take-offs of various old TV commercials (one of which occurs mid-way through the closing credits--those who depart theaters early, take notice), and a quick satire of a famous JURASSIC PARK scene. Equally amusing are sequences where Garth reacts with horror to the thought of listening to mellow musician Kenny G, and where Wayne, Garth, and friends impersonate the Village People.
That's about it, though, and even the funniest parts are far-from- original. In fact, you'd be hard-pressed to find anything in this movie that's unique. Even more unfortunate is that WAYNE'S WORLD 2 is in the unenviable position of having been outdone by the movie preview before it. Packaged along with the feature presentation is a trailer for Paramount's March release THE NAKED GUN 33 1/3, and this 90-second gem is far better than anything that WAYNE'S WORLD 2 has to offer.
In addition to Myers and Carvey, Tia Carrere also returns, although her character is relegated to a disjointed subplot that involves an underscripted slimeball record producer played by Christopher Walken (who does a marvellous job acting as if he's playing the heavy in a serious movie). There are a number of cameos--by Kim Basinger, Drew Barrymore, Heather Locklear, Charlton Heston, Kevin Pollack, Olivia D'Abo, Jay Leno, Rip Taylor, Aerosmith, and others - but few of these provide anything beyond juvenile puns and one-liners. At times, WAYNE'S WORLD 2 tries to be like THE NAKED GUN, and falls flat on its face.
In the final analysis, WAYNE'S WORLD 2 lacks inspiration, and uses up ninety-five minutes trying to find some. As far as sequels go, this is definitely not the worst of the year, and there are enough moments to provide satisfaction to those who go in with suitably-limited expectations, but this shtick is getting old. This is mass-market comedy at its least impressive.
