Taking a look at the above rating, you might be tempted to make a comment along the lines of, "Oh well, I guess the second BEETHOVEN isn't as good as the first." While that might seem a logical assumption (given that a 3.9 isn't the kind of number on expects from a rousing success), it ignores one basic fact: I hated BEETHOVEN. I didn't just dislike the film, I loathed it--so much, in fact that it managed to make by bottom 10 of 1992 list.
Having made my feelings on the original perfectly clear, it's time to examine this worthy dog (sorry, couldn't resist) of a sequel. It is better than its predecessor, and demonstrably so. Before I "count the ways," however, here are a few words about the storyline.
It's puppy love for Beethoven, who falls prey to the wiles of a female Saint Bernard named Missy. Thus begins a series of clandestine trysts in the basement of Missy's mean and vicious owner Regina (Debi Mazar). The end result is a group of four very young Beethoven clones that end up hidden in the basement of George and Alice Newton (Charles Grodin and Bonnie Hunt). Surprisingly, the bulk of this movie is not about how the dogs tear up the house. Instead, the film is content to focus upon the rather insipid lives of the three Newton children. Only at the end, when Regina and her sleazeball boyfriend (Chris Penn) try to capture the puppies and off their dad, do the dogs take center stage.
Now it's time to compare the sequel to the original, and understand why I didn't leave the theater shaking my head in disgust.
To start with, BEETHOVEN'S SECOND made me laugh four or five times more than the first movie (when I didn't chuckle once). Some of the jokes are rather cruel (along the lines of what happened to the crooks in HOME ALONE), but they're still amusing. An unintentional moment of mirth comes from seeing Debi Mazar's too-obvious stunt double take a fall for her.
Second, Charles Grodin and Bonnie Hunt have settled into roles that they seemed terribly embarrassed to be playing in BEETHOVEN. Last time around, the dog may have outacted them, but they get their revenge this time, when they manage to give better performances than no fewer than six canines.
Third, there aren't nearly as many truly embarrassing moments featuring the Newton kids. In fact, Nicholle Tom (who plays Ryce Newton) has a few scenes where she does something very much like acting.
Fourth, the story, as outlined above, isn't nearly as painful as its predecessor. Granted, this one is dumb, but it doesn't reach the horribly inept levels to which BEETHOVEN sank. This is a case of general stupidity not quite being as pervasive.
The audience at which BEETHOVEN is aimed is pretty much the same as for the original. Children younger than ten years of age will enjoy themselves immensely, and adults who aren't much more discriminating than their offspring will also have a good time. However, those who expect legitimate entertainment are in for an unfortunate surprise--not that anyone should go into BEETHOVEN'S SECOND without a fair idea of what they're going to get. The basic premise is hardly a secret.
On a more serious note, there is one area in which this film makes an unforgivable blunder. It attempts, in a rather offhand way, to address the issue of teen date rape (no actual rape occurs, but it's clear where things are headed). This is turned into a big joke as Beethoven literally brings down the house, but the introduction and handling of this serious societal problem is worse than a miscalculation--it's irresponsible and insensitive. If a movie intends to involve date rape, it should deal with the problem, not treat it like a passing and inconsequential incident.
BEETHOVEN'S SECOND is one of those movies that doesn't require a review for the reader to determine whether or not he or she will be entertained. If you like Charles Grodin, Bonnie Hunt, Saint Bernards, and/or the first BEETHOVEN, you'll find something to enjoy about this movie, despite its numerous obvious faults. Otherwise, don't bother. Unless you have kids, that is. Then you may not have a choice.
