Starring: Stockard Channing, Donald Sutherland, Will Smith, Ian McKellen, Mary Beth Hurt, Bruce Davison, Heather Graham Director: Fred Schepisi Producers: Fred Schepisi and Arnon Milchan Screenplay: John Guare, based on his play Music: Jerry Goldsmith Released by MGM
Ouisa and Flan Kittredge (Stockard Channing and Donald Sutherland) live and move in the upper echelons of New York society, enjoying the fortunes gleaned from their business ventures--brokering art objects for exceptional profit. On a night when they're entertaining a South African millionaire named Geoffrey (Ian McKellen), Paul (Will Smith) enters their lives. A con man from the streets of Boston, Paul is looking for an easy mark, and finds it in the Kittredges and their rich guest. He sells them a story about being the son of actor Sydney Poitier, cooks them dinner, and ends up being invited to spend the night. From that moment on, Paul becomes one thing to Flan--an anecdote to tell friends, but something different and more important to Ouisa--a mirror in which she can see the emptiness of her own existence.
Even if I hadn't known beforehand that SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION was adapted from a stage play, the script makes it obvious. This is a "talky" motion picture that splits its time between skewering the vacuous lives of people like the Kittredges and examining the forces that mould Paul into the person he becomes. Chameleon-like, he is not just an imposter, but a man who literally becomes the person he claims to be--and during SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION, he pretends to be a lot of people. However, there are certain elements of Paul's basic nature--namely his homosexuality and insecurity--that follow him regardless of which identity he dons.
The dialogue is the best part of SIX DEGREES; it absolutely sparkles with wit and intelligence. Sometimes it gets a bit too pretentious--the discussion between Paul, Ouisa, and Flan on imagination is one such example--but overall it's a biting and satirical indictment on those who possess ideals as high in the sky as their social standing. Paul may be the con-man, but it doesn't take much insight to see that Ouisa and Flan are no more "real" than he is.
The title SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION refers to the theory that every man or woman is separated from any other man or woman by no more than six people. It's an appropriate title for the film, since the themes of identity and relationships are integral to the plot. Ouisa makes a telling comment when she remarks that Paul has done more for her in one evening than her children did in a lifetime.
There are several hilarious moments, each of which requires understanding of the characters and the author's motives. Especially memorable is a scene where various parents confront their collegiate students, and we get to see just how silly are the ideals held dear by the people inhabiting SIX DEGREES' world.
For all that most of the movie is well-scripted and crisply-directed (Fred Schepisi keeps things moving at an amazing clip), the ending is a letdown. Not only does it lack the depth and sparkle of what came before, but its attempt to hammer home a message already delivered seems unnecessary and tedious. At best, Ouisa's final decision is weakly motivated, and chimes a dissonant chord.
Acting-wise, this is Stockard Channing's movie, and her performance, a reprisal of the role she played on stage, is far above that of any of her co-stars. The only other player of note is Will Smith, who shows that he can do more than the silly comedy of a weekly television program. Smith's Paul doesn't have the impact or strength of personality of Channing's Ouisa, but he never gets lost in the background.
Ultimately, SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION will succeed or fail for the individual viewer based on their expectations and preferences. This is an "offbeat" movie, and its presentation of universal themes is far from mainstream methods. It has quite a bit to say, and gets most of the messages across while entertaining the audience. The greatest fault of SIX DEGREES is assuming a level of intelligence throughout, then abandoning that belief at the very end.
