The original MY GIRL was something of a mildly-entertaining, inoffensive motion picture that adequately blended light comedy with some occasionally-manipulative drama. The sequel retains not only the characters from its predecessor, but much of the same feel, as well.
Several years have passed since the events of MY GIRL. Harry Sultanfuss (Dan Aykroyd) is now married to Shelly (Jamie Lee Curtis), and the two are expecting their first child. Vada (Anna Chlumsky), now thirteen, is jealous of the treatment her as-yet unborn sibling is receiving, and begins wondering about her mother, who died shortly after her birth. Vada's quest for knowledge takes her away from an overprotective father to Los Angeles, where she stays with her uncle Phil (Richard Masur). There she meets a boy of her age, Nick (Austin O'Brien), who agrees to help her track down old friends and acquaintances of her mother's.
At its worst, MY GIRL 2 is light on plot and heavy on 70s pop hits. At its best, the film is good-natured and occasionally touching. MY GIRL 2 has its share of corny moments, too many of which occur around the climax, but these don't invalidate the movie's strengths. While not possessed of the most original storyline, the picture manages to make Vada's quest mostly-believable, enabling the audience to actually care about how things turn out.
Even more than the first installment, this film focuses on Vada. Her father and Shelly, each of whom had significant roles in MY GIRL, are reduced to supporting characters, as is Uncle Phil. Nick's otherwise superfluous presence gives Vada a chance for a quick romance.
The movie's biggest mistake is the inordinate amount of time spent on the recycled "man who cannot commit to a relationship" involving Vada's uncle. Phil is a weak character to begin with, so this subplot quickly becomes tedious. MY GIRL 2 would have been enhanced, not diminished, by the deletion of those offending scenes.
Dan Aykroyd and Jamie Lee Curtis seem comfortable in roles which demand little or no effort. Anna Chlumsky, looking much more mature than previously, is still "rough around the edges" in her acting, but she gives a performance that's generally convincing. Austin O'Brien, last seen riding sidekick to Arnold Schwarzenegger in LAST ACTION HERO, is almost Ms. Chlumsky's match.
MY GIRL 2 is unlikely to win any awards, and its arrival on movie screens is relatively unheralded, but it provides a reasonably entertaining ninety-eight minutes. While the original concept didn't demand a continuation, this is a rare sequel that manages to do what it's supposed to--advance the story without becoming redundant. The film is undemanding of its audience, and those that enjoyed the first installment will likely be pleased by this one.
