For those who think that foreign-language films must always be pretentious and lugubrious, COMBINATION PLATTER provides a pointed counterexample. Although this is not an entirely Chinese movie (it takes place in Flushing, New York, and approximately forty percent of the dialogue is in English), the presence of frequent subtitles will argue otherwise as far as most casual movie-goers are concerned.
Everything that happens in COMBINATION PLATTER revolves around the employees at Flushing's Szechuan Inn, a Chinese restaurant with a mixed staff of native Chinese, American-born Chinese (or "ABCs", as they're referred to), and Americans. The largest piece of the plot goes to one of the waiters, Robert (Jeff Lau), a Hong Kong transplant who's willing to try just about anything to get his green card, including paying $25,000 for a citizen (preferably one of Chinese descent, although she doesn't have to speak the language) to marry him. Sam (Lester "Chit-Man" Chan), a waiter possessed of a suave and arrogant disposition, has a gambling problem. Benny (Colin Mitchell), a busboy, is finding it a little odd working in an establishment where so many people speak a language other than English. Then there are the regular customers, including a pair of sports fans who tell "great stories" and a couple that argue even as he searches for a memorable way to propose marriage.
Most movies are designed as methods of escapism, opening windows on lifestyles and stories that, whether momentous or not, are generally unfamiliar to the bulk of the audience. Once in a while, however, a film manages to capture the essence of a familiar reality, and its attention to detail can make viewing the commonplace a highly-entertaining experience. COMBINATION PLATTER is such a motion picture.
Helped immeasurably by Yoshifumi Hosoya's 16 mm camerawork and filmed in a restaurant owned by the director's family, Tony Chan's motion picture seems almost like a documentary. His dialogue is earthy, his characters have the "feel" of real people, and his comedy is natural (as opposed to the often-contrived and artificial humor of most films). Granted, there aren't any scenes in COMBINATION PLATTER that will cause audience members to roll in the aisles with laughter, but the movie's sardonic wit will provoke chuckles aplenty.
Ever wonder what it's like behind-the-scenes at a restaurant? COMBINATION PLATTER gives an uncompromisingly accurate view, broadening its scope beyond the daily grind at the Szechuan Inn to follow one of the characters, Robert, home. His quest to find a wife could be (and has been) the premise for romantic comedies, but Tony Chan handles this situation much differently than a GREEN CARD.
COMBINATION PLATTER also attempts to present a different perspective on the immigrant experience. By using a uncommon setting and not dwelling on the potentially-downbeat elements of the situation, Mr. Chan succeeds at this difficult task. Despite the pursuit of immigration officials, the employees at the Szechuan Inn have a positive outlook on the country they're presently living in.
One might wonder what could be so fascinating about spending eighty-odd minutes with the employees of a Chinese restaurant? Fortunately, it doesn't take long for the script and actors to answer that question. COMBINATION PLATTER is light entertainment, a motion picture "snack" of sorts. And speaking of food, it might be best to see this film on a full stomach, lest you may find yourself leaving the theater for the nearest establishment offering Moo Goo Gai Pan.
