Starring: Steven Seagal, Michael Caine, Joan Chen, John C. McGinley Director: Steven Seagal Producers: Steven Seagal, Julius R. Nasso, and A. Kitman Ho Screenplay: Ed Horowitz and Robin U. Russin Music: Basil Poledouris Released by Warner Brothers
One thing is for certain--the tag lines for this man's movies aren't difficult to remember. "Steven Seagal is ABOVE THE LAW." "Steven Seagal is MARKED FOR DEATH." "Steven Seagal is HARD TO KILL." "Steven Seagal is OUT FOR JUSTICE." "Steven Seagal is UNDER SIEGE." "Steven Seagal is ON DEADLY GROUND." How about this for his next film: "Steven Seagal is UNABLE TO ACT."
Forrest Taft (Steven Seagal) is an ex-government operative who has signed on as a troubleshooter and firefighter for Aegis Oil, operated by the vicious and ruthless Michael Jennings (Michael Caine). While Taft is willing to go along to a point with Jennings' unethical and environmentally-destructive business practices, he eventually arrives at the inevitable decision that he can no longer continue to work for Aegis. So Jennings decides to have him killed, putting his top "problem solver" (John C. McGinley) on the job. The hit is botched, however, and Taft survives to become the local natives' champion in their fight against the oil company.
I suppose I should give Mr. Seagal credit for trying to tie the important theme of environmental rape into ON DEADLY GROUND. Unfortunately, for a number of reasons, the attempt really doesn't work. Generally, the best way to promote a message, no matter what sort of medium it's being filtered through, is through subtlety. This film has clue about such methods, and pushes across its agenda in an alarmingly-obvious and intrusive manner. Taft's five-minute lecture at the end about the evils of poisoning the planet's natural resources belongs in a public service announcement, not an action film. This overdose of political correctness becomes nauseating.
Oddly, no matter how proper the movie is on the issue of the environment, it has nothing to say about the flagrant and excessive use of guns. The body count in ON DEADLY GROUND is exceptionally high. This isn't really unexpected, but amidst all the preaching, it seems a trifle hypocritical.
Themes and messages aside, ON DEADLY GROUND is moderately successful in the action department. The second half, with its spectacular pyrotechnics and energetic shoot-outs, helps make up for a sluggish first portion, which features a lengthy sequence delving into Eskimo mysticism. The thunderous, pulsing score by Basil Poledouris is just right.
One of the problems that I have with Mr. Seagal's movies is that the main character never seems to be in serious jeopardy. In part, that's the difference between a film like ON DEADLY GROUND and DIE HARD. Bruce Willis' John McLaine gets beaten and bloodied, but no one ever lays a hand on Forrest Taft. The only time he gets injured is when a massive explosion peppers his back with metallic fragments. Invincible heroes like this reduce a film's tension to unappealing levels.
While Seagal the actor may be ON DEADLY GROUND's greatest problem, Seagal the director shows a surprisingly deft hand. I wouldn't want him in control of a drama, or even a dramatic scene, but he has a flair with action sequences.
Sometimes a reasonably-serious actor can take on an over-the-top villain's role and do a fabulous job with it (Tommy Lee Jones in UNDER SIEGE, Alan Rickman in DIE HARD). However, while Michael Caine chews on the scenery and spits out every line with relish, he's more loud than menacing. In the end, he's too unworthy an adversary, much like John C. McGinley's whiny character. Mike Starr's barroom bully radiates more pure nastiness.
The less said about Joan Chen, the better. To say that her talents are wasted is to understate the matter.
Review or no review, it isn't difficult to identify those who will and won't like this film. There's plenty of violence, lots of fights and explosions, and the miniatures special effects work is impressive. A sizable portion of the "Seagal crowd" will likely be annoyed by the environmental message and the Eskimo religious practices because they interfere with ON DEADLY GROUND's pacing. In the end, however, there's probably enough "bang" to overcome these flaws--for Mr. Seagal's fans, if not everyone else.
