Starring: Michael J. Fox, Kirk Douglas, Nancy Travis, Olivia d'Abo, Phil Hartman, Ed Begley Jr., Coleen Camp, Jonathan Lynn Director: Jonathan Lynn Producer: Brian Grazer Screenplay: Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel Music: Randy Edelman Released by Universal Pictures
GREEDY is one of those motion pictures that doesn't quite know what it wants to be. It starts off as a farce with an edge, then changes midway through into one of those "feel-good" movies that the writing team of Ganz and Mandel (A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN, PARENTHOOD, SPLASH) are known for. The ending is a complete cop-out, but there are at least enough laughs along the way to make the experience mildly palatable.
Joe McTeague (Kirk Douglas) isn't dying--much to the chagrin of his large, greedy family. But, since Joe has yet to decide who to leave his considerable fortune to, various nieces and nephews are vying with each other for Uncle Joe's favor. Carl (Ed Begley, Jr.) has named both of his boys Joe, and Frank (Phil Hartman) has hired a private investigator to dig up dirt on the other family members.
At one of Joe's birthday parties, the bickering has just gotten started when the guest of honor introduces his new "companion", a young British girl named Molly (Olivia d'Abo), who dotes on the old man. Panic ensues as everyone sees their beloved inheritance slipping out of reach. Willing to try anything to limit Molly's influence, Frank and Carl seek out Danny McTeague (Michael J. Fox), a pro bowler who was once Uncle Joe's "favorite boy" before a family quarrel caused Danny's father to break with his relatives. Because he has fond memories of Joe, Danny agrees to visit the old man, and soon finds himself embroiled in the frantic scramble for money.
The first portion of GREEDY, which features the antics of various family members as they attempt to outdo each other in proving their worth to Joe, is brilliant. It's fresh, funny, and delivered with a scathing edge. Had director Jonathan Lynn (MY COUSIN VINNY) framed the entire movie this way, it's interesting to ponder what the result might have been. However, the moment Michael J. Fox comes on the scene, GREEDY begins gravitating towards a typical, formula-driven comedy. There are still laughs to be had, but these form the backdrop for an increasingly ordinary film.
The less said about the ending, the better. Like the wrap up of another Ganz/Mandel story, PARENTHOOD, GREEDY's conclusion is too pat--all happy and upbeat. The big "plot twist" is obvious, despite attempts to throw in a red herring or two. Some of what happens during the final quarter-hour rivals SCENT OF A WOMAN's finale for mind-numbing, Hollywood-style audience manipulation.
Even though the introduction of Michael J. Fox's Danny signifies the beginning of GREEDY's decline, the actor acquits himself well. Although affable as usual, Mr. Fox plays his role with a little more spirit than has been evident in some of his recent box-office duds (the latest of which was the forgettable FOR LOVE OR MONEY). Kirk Douglas is adequate, but the role of Joe wouldn't challenge any actor's skills. Nancy Travis is flat in the admittedly-limited part as Robin Hunter, Danny's girlfriend. Olivia d'Abo has spunk, and the costume designers have found numerous ways to show off her natural physical assets without being too revealing (the only nudity is a shot of Michael J. Fox's backside).
The scene-stealer is Phil Hartman, whose deadpan delivery is perfect. Even late in the film, when the story is on course for its seemingly inevitable conclusion, Mr. Hartman's presence lends a sarcastic bite to several scenes. According to insiders, the part of Frank was expanded from what was initially scripted when director Jonathan Lynn recognized how big an asset the actor had become to the production.
During the course of this film, there are quite a few laughs to be had, and if the sole purpose of going to a comedy is for laughter (irrespective of story content), then the movie succeeds. Unfortunately, looking beyond the gags and jokes, GREEDY suffers from a split personality, and the resulting uneven tone can lead to feelings of ambivalence. Like the relatives vying for Uncle Joe's money, GREEDY tries a little too hard to be likable.
