Starring: Nicolas Cage, Shirley MacLaine, Austin Pendleton, Richard Griffiths, James Rebhorn, Edward Albert Director: Hugh Wilson Producers: Ned Tanen and Nancy Graham Tanen Screenplay: Hugh Wilson and Peter Torokvei Music: Michael Convertino Released by TriStar Pictures
How many different spins have their been on the "buddy film"? >From THE ODD COUPLE to LETHAL WEAPON, it seems that just about every angle on this subject has been covered. Then along comes a movie like GUARDING TESS that thinks it has a unique twist to this tried-and-true theme. However, an unusual pairing doesn't equate to a noteworthy picture.
Since the death her late husband the President, former First Lady Tess Carlisle (Shirley MacLaine) has been living in a house in Sommersville, Ohio, under the watchful eye of Secret Service agent Doug Chesnick (Nicolas Cage) and his team of six men. Just when Doug thinks his term of duty is over, Tess requests that he return for another three years, and what Tess wants, Tess gets. So, against his will (his alternative is the unemployment line), Doug remains in Sommersville, where his already- brittle relationship with the aging widow turns into an open contest of wills.
DRIVING MISS DAISY did it much better, but there are some shared themes between the 1989 Academy Award winning film and Hugh Wilson's GUARDING TESS. Both are about two mismatched people coming to know and appreciate each other, and eventually realizing how important their relationship is. This, the central theme of every "buddy film," lies at the core of GUARDING TESS. Only the details surrounding it have changed to fit the situation.
The story is not especially original. Mostly predictable, GUARDING TESS is light on surprises, but that's a given for any film that falls even loosely into a formula category. Slow to start with, the movie eventually slips into a flow, but the ending is burdened by a poorly-reasoned and rather silly kidnapping subplot. Don't think too hard during this part, because a lot of what goes on doesn't make much sense.
The comedy is mostly low-key, and much of it works. Coming from writer/director Hugh Wilson, the man behind the original POLICE ACADEMY, it's nice to find a motion picture whose laugh-to-joke ratio is relatively high. GUARDING TESS relies far more on verbal jousting and body language than on slapstick and other ridiculous gags.
Nicolas Cage carries the movie. The energy and audience involvement all come as a result of his engaging performance. Normally know for his manic on-screen antics, it's interesting to see Mr. Cage play a restrained role. The harnessed emotion is always there, just beneath the surface, waiting to break free.
Shirley MacLaine does a reasonable job as Tess, and holds her own in scenes with her co-star, although her magnetism isn't as palpable as his. The rest of the cast, including such familiar names as Austin Pendleton and James Rebhorn, provide fine supporting work.
Ultimately, while GUARDING TESS is a genial comedy that provides a reasonable ninety-five minutes' entertainment, it's sadly lacking in originality. There are a few good jokes, some nice chemistry between the two leads, a little character development, and a little pathos, but it all doesn't add up to very much. The ingredients are there, but the final product wasn't prepared to its best advantage.
