As an example of modern cinematic art, THE CHASE is an utter failure. As a character study, it can't get past the comic book stage. As a tightly plotted thriller, it's missing about half the storyline. But as a piece of unfettered, unpretentious entertainment, it hits the bullseye. In the past few weeks, I've seen a number of movies that are unquestionably better, but few that I've enjoyed as much.
Wrongfully accused, arrested, and convicted of a bank robbery, Jack Hammond (Charlie Sheen) has decided that he'll never get justice from the legal system, and stages a jail break. Luck isn't with him, however, because his stolen VW gets ID'd by two cops when he stops for gas and a pack of cigarettes, and he's forced to take the nearest hostage. This happens to be Natalie Voss (Kristy Swanson), the daughter of billionaire Dalton Voss (Ray Wise), the "Donald Trump of California." Together in Natalie's red BMW, the two race south towards Mexico, their relationship changing with every passing mile as an ever-growing fleet of black-and- whites stays on their tail.
THE CHASE is bursting with energy, almost to the point of an overload. Films that move at such a blindingly fast pace often exhaust the audience long before the final credits roll. Give writer/director Adam Rifkin credit for recognizing when to let up a little to allow his viewers an opportunity to catch their collective breaths. THE CHASE is one wild ride, but it won't leave you gasping.
In addition to the impressively choreographed crash sequences, Mr. Rifkin's major contribution is a script laden with wit and satire. His repeated jabs at action films, hostage dramas, and especially the television news industry, are far more perceptive than one might expect from a piece of cartoon fluff like this. THE CHASE is rarely serious about anything, and the humor ranges from amusing to hilarious.
One of the most incisive elements of this film is its presentation of the one-upsmanship of the various news crews following the fugitives. One station sends their traffic helicopter in pursuit. Another reporter stands by the side of the road to get the first ground-level view of the chase. A third cameraman straps himself to the side of a speeding news van that pulls alongside the BMW, trying to get a peek inside. Then there is the usual assortment of vacuous announcers, including a wonderfully droll cameo of Cary Elwes (as anchorman Steve Horsegroovy) staring blankly into the camera.
In the leading police car are officers Dobbs (Henry Rollins) and Figus (Josh Mostel), along with a pair shooting footage for a COPS-like "real drama" television program. The interaction between the policemen and their passengers lampoons this richly-deserving target.
Charlie Sheen who, like Leslie Nielsen, seems to have found a recent niche in comedy, works well in this role, and develops a surprisingly effective chemistry with co-star Kristy Swanson. One might think that being confined to the front seat of a car would limit their interaction, but as they move along the predictable route from fear to empathy to love, it's surprising how few constraints there turn out to be.
Analyzing THE CHASE is a fruitless endeavor. The movie never pretends to be something that it isn't. Whether your preference is to focus on the caustic humor, the nonstop action, or both, the point is the same. Sit back, suspend all unnecessary brain activity, and start munching on popcorn. These ninety minutes will fly by.
