Simplicity, sincerity, and realism are the hallmarks of Ken Loach's RAINING STONES. With an uncompromising look at England's lowest class, this film explores the facets of living hand-to-mouth in a society where work is scarce and a pint at the pub offers life's sole release.
Bob (Bruce Jones) and his family are barely making ends meet before two events upset the careful balance. First, Bob's van is stolen, then he learns that the outfit for the First Communion of his daughter Coleen (Gemma Phoenix) is going to cost more than 100 pounds. His wife Anne (Julie Brown) and pastor (Tom Hickey) advise him to take a less expensive route, such as renting a dress, but Bob will have none of that. Nothing but the best for his daughter on this special occasion. The problem is, with him on the dole, money is hard to come by, and odd jobs don't pay much.
Although possessing the grittiness and rare honesty of Mr. Loach's previous project, RIFF RAFF, this is not a re-telling of that story. Anyone familiar with the director's work, however, will recognize the characteristic style. Dark locales, underexposed interiors, and actors with accents so thick that some might find subtitles helpful--all these elements are synthesized to deliver an amazingly real portrait of life as a member of Middleton's unemployed and underprivileged.
There's no preaching in RAINING STONES, and the narrative never condescends to the characters, no matter what their circumstances are. This movie presents life as it is--no regrets or complaints. Without ever mentioning politics, Mr. Loach makes the most powerful and effective of political statements--one that relies on subtlety and the intelligence of the audience.
The plot is entirely believable and never predictable, simply because it goes against the grain of what typically comes out of Hollywood. Jim Allen's script mixes portions of unforced comedy and natural tension into a deceptively straightforward tale that would find few takers in the film making mainstream.
The characters are realized by little-known actors who deserve greater recognition, at least based on the strengths of their performances here. Bob and Anne are a real couple facing real problems; Coleen is a six-year old forced to face the violence of her world at a young age; and Father Barry is a priest who has a clear view of the conditions of his flock, and therefore doesn't always offer the pious advice one might expect from a man of the cloth.
RAINING STONES is a mirror that reflects our times, with themes that are universal. You don't have to be a resident of Middleton to understand what director Ken Loach is saying. That there is humor and warmth in the midst of such poverty speaks volumes for the indomitable spirit of humanity, not to mention the strength of this movie's ability to capture that.
