Date Released: 3/11/93 (limited) Running Length: 1:57 Rated: R (Language, sexual situations, mature themes)
Starring: Hugh Grant, Andie MacDowell, Kristin Scott Thomas, Simon Callow, James Fleet, John Hannah, Charlotte Coleman, David Bower, Rowan Atkinson Director: Mike Newell Producer: Duncan Kenworthy Screenplay: Richard Curtis Music: Richard Rodney Bennett Released by Gramercy Pictures
The simplest and most honest expression of praise that I can offer Mike Newell's latest movie is that this represents two hours of solid movie magic. FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is a film with the rare ability to make an audience laugh (and laugh hard) and cry, without ever seeming manipulative or going hopelessly over-the-top.
Charles (Hugh Grant), now in his fourth decade of life, is a "serial monogamist"--someone who moves from girlfriend to girlfriend without ever falling in love. His friends have started down the matrimonial road, but not Charles. Thoughts of spending the rest of his life with someone never enter his head, until one day at a wedding when he encounters Carrie (Andie MacDowell), an American fashion editor. And, although the two enjoy a brief tryst at an inn, Charles' typical British reticence kicks in, and Carrie is on her way back to America before he realizes he should have said something.
FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is about, well, four weddings and a funeral (actually, if you want to be picky, it's about three weddings, a funeral, and another wedding). While the central story of this charming motion picture is fairly common romantic comedy fare, it is framed in a plot filled with little twists and turns, lots of laughs, and a frothy atmosphere that is nothing short of intoxicating.
Mike Newell, whose recent directing credits include ENCHANTED APRIL and INTO THE WEST, continues to show a deft hand when it comes to good, escapist fun. Mr. Newell's direction is understated--he allows his actors and the script to carry the film, which results in a satisfying mix of lighthearted comedy with a dash or two of pathos (including an emotional reading of W.H. Auden).
Screenwriter Richard Curtis (who also penned THE TALL GUY) is quick to let the humor start flowing, and once it starts, it never stops (although it slows a little during the film's second half, especially during the funeral). The scenes most likely to cause uncontrollable laughter occur during the second wedding and center on Rowan Atkinson as a somewhat confused priest. That Mr. Atkinson feels at home with a Curtis script isn't surprising, since the two collaborated on the British TV show BLACKADDER.
Hugh Grant, currently stealing scenes in SIRENS, is equally as good here, playing a likeable if somewhat twitty character. This is truly a case of perfect casting, as there's no scene, whether comic or serious, that Mr. Grant is incapable of carrying off. In the process, he evokes memories of a young David Niven.
Andie MacDowell, playing opposite Grant, is perhaps somewhat less of a perfect choice, but she's more than adequate as the carefree American who connects with Charles. The supporting cast varies from good to excellent, and features a number of vaguely-familiar faces for those who are used to watching productions from across the Atlantic.
FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is a modern comedy with a very traditional theme. It blends good breeding and bad language; laughter and tears; and marriage and friendship into a thoroughly enjoyable result. Mike Newell knows what his viewers want, but appreciates them enough not to give it in a predictable or obvious manner--and that is the greatest pleasure of all in watching this movie.
