Starring: Claudio Bigagli, Galatea Ranzi, Michael Vartan, Lino Capolicchio, Constanze Engelbrecht Directors: Paolo and Vittorio Taviani Producer: Grazia Volpi Screenplay: Paolo and Vittorio Taviani and Sandro Petraglia Music: Nicola Pilvani Released by Fine Line Features In Italian (with a little French) with subtitles
The latest offering from the Taviani brothers (PADRE PADRONE and THE NIGHT OF THE SHOOTING STARS) is FIORILE, a series of four vignettes interconnected by the common theme of a curse that haunts a family through the centuries. Since the late 1790s, the Benedettis--called the Maledettis ("the cursed") by the peasants who accept the stories about them--have been victims of a series of strange and tragic events. If fate has a sense of irony, it's on display here, as the source of this family's riches lies at the root of their misery.
The story opens a few years before 1800, as Napoleon's army marches through Tuscany. A young French officer, Jean (Michael Vartan), falls in love with a local girl, Elisabetta (Galatea Ranzi), whom he calls "Fiorile" after the French Revolutionaries' name for the month of May. While the two dally in the woods, Elisabetta's brother Corrado (Claudio Bigagli) steals a chest full of gold that had been placed in Jean's charge. This act leads to the officer's disgrace, and heartbreak for Elisabetta.
One hundred years later, one of Elisabetta's descendents (also played by Galatea Ranzi, to emphasize the familial relationship) is given an opportunity to avenge her ancestor. The target of her wrath is her brother, a near-copy of Corrado (Claudio Bigagli again).
During the war years of the mid-forties, another member of the Benedetti family, Massimo (Michael Vartan's second role), must struggle with his belief in the family curse while fighting to help the anti-Mussolini rebels with whom he sympathizes. Captured, then inexplicably set free by the fascists, Massimo must live not only with the specter of the Benedetti history hanging over his life, but also the weight of guilt that he was spared when his comrades were killed.
The final episode of FIORILE takes place in modern times, and has Massimo's son and grandchildren visiting the old man at the Tuscany home where he has become a hermit. Their arrival opens old wounds and forces him to face truths which he would prefer to hide from.
The 18th Century segment of FIORILE is brilliantly-written and performed. Irony, tragedy, and romance blend together to form what is by far the best half-hour of the film. After that, however, the characters become progressively less-compelling, and the storyline gradually loses its appeal. The second vignette is largely static; the third manages something of a recovery; and the fourth goes nowhere, doing little to close the "curse" story arc with a satisfying resolution.
The Tavianis have done some interesting things in this movie, the most notable of which is casting the three main leads in multiple roles to emphasize the intertwining of the fates of the Benedettis across the decades. Unfortunately, the brothers are unable to sustain the sense of immediacy inherent in the first act. FIORILE starts strong but finishes weak.
The cost of greed is not a new theme to the movies, nor is the concept of the sins of the fathers being visited upon their children. FIORILE weds the two together, but makes the mistake of presenting the initial act far more impressively than the consequences, and that somehow seems in large part to defeat the point that the filmmakers are attempting to present.
