Date Released: no U.S. release planned Running Length: 0:55 Rated: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, nudity, sex, language)
Starring: Katja Riemann, Nina Kronjager, Max Tidof, Gedeon Burkhard, Daniela Lunkewitz Director: Katja von Garnier Producers: Katja von Garnier and Ewa Karlstrom Screenplay: Katja von Garnier, Benjamin Taylor, and Hannes Jaenicke Music: Peter Wenke and Tilman Hohn In German with subtitles
MAKING UP is the debut of 26-year old German director Katja von Garnier, who completed this surprisingly-polished one-hour feature as her graduate thesis for film school. Despite its relatively humble origins, the movie has become a top ten hit in its native country, and, after seeing the picture, it's not hard to understand why. MAKING UP is charming.
While many of the plot elements in this romantic comedy are staples of Hollywood's ventures into the genre, von Garnier avoids a number of pitfalls common to typical big-budget American ventures. The female characters are more real than the men and, in a case of turnabout being fair play, it's the males who are reduced to the level of sexual objects while the women have all the good lines. Also, the running length is about right for the story. There is no evidence of padding things out; when the story has been told, the end credits roll. This keeps the pace consistent and energetic.
Frenzy (Katja Riemann) and Maischa (Nina Kronjager) are best friends. Frenzy is older, more mature, and supposedly secure enough in her self- awareness that she doesn't have to be in a relationship to feel fulfilled. Maischa, on the other hand, finds it difficult to live if she isn't half of a couple. One day at a party, she spies Rene (Gedeon Burkhard), and falls for him on the spot. After arranging a date with him, Maischa convinces Frenzy to come along as a companion for Rene's friend Mark (Max Tidof). Frenzy and Mark take an instant dislike to each other, but it doesn't take a cinematic genius to guess in which direction their relationship is going.
MAKING UP has just about everything going for it - strong writing, inventive direction, and believable performances - except originality. The movie is comfortable because its situations, even though presented in a slightly different culture, are familiar. The two main characters have a real chemistry that is rare between two women (probably because of the dearth of solidly-written female characters).
MAKING UP is peppered with laughs, never taking itself too seriously. The scenes of the women getting ready for their dates are delightful - all the moreso because they have the distinct "ring of truth." The script is as perceptive as it is humorous, investigating such issues as why people are afraid to live their lives alone and how it's easier to hide than confront loneliness.
Katja von Garnier's first movie exhibits a liveliness that dis- tinguishes it from most modern romantic comedies. The best part about the film is its characters, who would be just as absorbing if all they did was sit around and talk - which is most certainly not the case. Here, there's a lot of making out as well as making up.
