While it may not be as enchanting as ENCHANTED APRIL (although it features two of that film's stars), as appealing as HEAR MY SONG, or as funny as FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, John Irvin's delightfully charming WIDOWS' PEAK can hold its own against those and many more. This is a very British comedy that will cause laughter and smiles wherever it is shown.
Overlooking the Irish village of Kilshannon is Widows' Peak - a group of select houses owned and inhabited exclusively by the rich women of the community who have buried at least one husband. The matriarch of Widows' Peak is Mrs. Doyle-Counihan (Joan Plowright), who lives with her son Godfrey (Adrian Dunbar). Also inhabiting the peak is Mrs. O'Hare (Mia Farrow), a woman who has never been married and who hasn't a penny to her name. Then there's the newcomer: a beautiful, young war-widow (it's 1920) named Edwina Broome (Natasha Richardson), who brings with her more secrets than those already buried in and out of the graveyard.
Secrets are indeed at the center of WIDOWS' PEAK, and much of the comedy in this lighthearted romp comes through their revelation. Though the film is a trifle overplotted, it's still enjoyable to uncover the next sordid detail of someone's past before the characters on screen do so.
With a similar infectious charm to any of the previously-mentioned movies, WIDOWS' PEAK draws its audience in with promises of little more than a enjoyable time - a goal at which it succeeds. There are no deep or hidden meanings to be found, no matter how much the plot itself relies on secrets.
Joan Plowright has settled nicely into playing the stuffy matron, and she is again successful in that role. Although the actress is more than capable of doing a dramatic turn when a part requires it, there's not much seriousness demanded from Mrs. Doyle-Counihan, and Mrs. Plowright pilfers countless scenes from her co-stars by sheer screen presence.
Mia Farrow turns in a better performance than she has given in a number of years. Having freed herself from Woody Allen's angst-riddled characters, she is allowed an opportunity to shine in a role that one might not typically associate with her. Meanwhile, Natasha Richardson (THE HANDMAID'S TALE) plays her part with a delicious "falseness" which betrays that something's up - although we don't know exactly what. Her American accent is flawless, which is something of a pleasant surprise.
Jim Broadbent (LIFE IS SWEET, ENCHANTED APRIL) and Adrian Dunbar (HEAR MY SONG) do solid jobs as supporting characters, but it's the women to whom every scene - and the movie as a whole - belongs. After all, it's not called WIDOWS' PEAK for nothing.
Although there may be one twist or turn too many, and the plot skeleton is not without its supporting contrivances, few viewers will complain. WIDOWS' PEAK, while admittedly not a great movie, offers a good time - and often that's all that is wanted from any motion picture.
