It's easy to describe TWO PLUS ONE as another Generation X motion picture. It is, after all, about a trio of late-twentysomething Philadelphians trying to straighten out their lives and relationships to prepare for when they turn thirty. The three principles are Eve (Dierdre Lewis), a video artist; Mark (William Sage), her career- oriented live-in lover; and Julian (Tony Vito), her freespirited dancer/ choreographer friend.
Coming out in the wake of such films as BODIES, REST AND MOTION, THREESOME, and REALITY BITES, TWO PLUS ONE immediately shows similarities and differences to those mainstream motion pictures. For one thing, the characters in this, director Eugene Martin's first feature, seem more real. Their problems are of the sort that everyday people encounter, not the too-obviously scripted dilemmas of the other films. As Martin says, "[TWO PLUS ONE] doesn't sound much different in its description from some of these other films, but hopefully when people get in there, they see themselves up there. It's different from some other 'Generation X' type movies that I think are a little too marketed, and they're being rejected because of that."
At the center of TWO PLUS ONE is Eve's growing dissatisfaction with her life, and her relationship with Mark in particular. Two years ago, when they moved in together, there was passion. Now, Mark is always too tired to make love, or preoccupied by his fascination with e-mail and the Internet. This makes Julian's lifestyle appear all- the-more attractive to Eve, who is looking for something - anything - to ignite her creativity.
The storyline of TWO PLUS ONE is particularly laudable in that it manages to capture the everyday activities of three people in a compelling fashion. By the end of the movie, you care about them. The resolution, such as it is, is the natural result of all that has gone before it.
Unfortunately, the script doesn't always live up to the promise of its story. The dialogue is often-stilted, and the voiceovers by Eve contain various profundities that signify nothing. These, along with a number of unconventional camera shots, appear to be an attempt to add a dash of "art" to TWO PLUS ONE. It turns out to be more distracting than successful.
What the acting lacks in polish, it almost makes up for with earnestness. After a few shaky opening scenes, in which all three principals are stiff and unconvincing, the performers grow into their roles. Most impressive of the three is Dierdre Lewis, who shows more promise and range than her younger sister Juliette. William Sage, a Hal Hartley regular, provides a familiar face and a stabilizing influence.
The score, by composer Matt Levy, is quirky, and includes elements of everything from rap to jazz. At its best, the music complements the intricacies of the characters' relationships. At its worst, when it becomes loud and cacophonous, it steals attention from everything else.
TWO PLUS ONE has all the qualities of an independent, low-budget feature (its total production cost was under $250,000). The intimacy created by the limitations of the production build a rapport between characters and audience. There's nothing big or bold in TWO PLUS ONE - just people living, loving, and talking - about everything from the meaning of life to the relationship between the information superhighway and art. This may not be the definitive Generation X movie, but it's certainly a different vantage point.
