Starring: Eddie Murphy, Judge Reinhold, Hector Elizondo, Theresa Randle, Timothy Carhart, Alan Young, Bronson Pinchot Director: John Landis Producers: Mace Neufeid and Robert Rehme Screenplay: Steven E. de Souza Music: Nile Rodgers Released by Paramount Pictures
Like THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN and BOOMERANG before it, BEVERLY HILLS COP III is another attempt by Eddie Murphy to regain the popularity he once held during the early and mid-80s. And, as was the case with those other two films, this isn't an inspiring comeback attempt. Judging from the lines (or lack thereof) at the box office, Paramount may have difficulty recouping Murphy's reported $15 million salary.
One wonders where the Eddie Murphy of 48 HOURS, TRADING PLACES, and BEVERLY HILLS COP has gone. The irreverence is still there, but there's no verve or freshness. Murphy's performance in this, the third installment of his popular gunplay-and-comedy series, is flat and mechanical. Watching Axel Foley (Murphy) "mourn" the death of his boss (and close friend) would be enough to convince anyone who didn't know better that the man has no acting talent.
The film starts in Detroit, with Axel and his team of cops raiding a chop shop and finding more than they bargained for. Inside is a truck full of U.S. mint paper, and the men who have stolen this truck are armed to the teeth. Axel's boss dies in his arms after being shot, and Axel vows revenge.
The trail of the criminals leads to Southern California and the Wonderwold theme park. After stopping by the Beverly Hills Police Department to obtain the aid of detectives Jon Flint (Hector Elizondo) and Billy Rosewood (Judge Reinhold), Axel heads off after his quarry. Ultimately, it's not as simple a task as merely finding the killer, however, since he turns out to be Ellis DeWald (Timothy Carhart) - an upstanding citizen and the head of Wonderworld's sizeable security force. Fortunately, Axel finds a pair of allies within the park - Janice (Theresa Randle, last seen opposite Wesley Snipes in SUGAR HILL) and Uncle Dave (Alan Young, best remembered as Wilbur from MR. ED).
All this is pretty unoriginal cops-and-robbers stuff, and that's basically what BEVERLY HILLS COP III is - routine. The one or two "surprises" should be obvious to those who are even half-watching what's going on. The comedy is mostly restricted to one-liners, some of which aren't funny. And the action is uninspired, barely tapping the vast potential of an amusement park chase film.
Bronson Pinchot returns as Serge, one of the most annoying personalities in any of Eddie Murphy's films. While humorous in small doses, this character comes dangerously close to being overexposed. At least the stuff with Serge's weapon, the "Annihilator 2000", is somewhat amusing, even if the parody is a little obvious.
Look for cameos by filmmakers George Lucas (STAR WARS), Joe Dante (GREMLINS), and John Singleton (BOYZ 'N THE HOOD), as well as special effects master Ray Harryhausen. None of these four have roles of any significance, but at least watching for them will give you something to do while slogging your way through the heart of this otherwise- uninvolving film.
BEVERLY HILLS COP 3 took a long time (7 years) to reach the screens, even though a sequel to number 2 was planned shortly after that movie's gross broke the $100 million mark. In Murphy's own words, the project was on hold until a script was found that showed Axel as someone who isn't just "...wide-eyed and babbling and walking around Beverly Hills." Unfortunately, in adding maturity, too much spontaneity was taken away. It looks like Murphy is going to have to try again for that comeback.
