Starring: John Goodman, Elizabeth Perkins, Rick Moranis, Rosie O'Donnell, Kyle MacLachlan, Halle Berry, Elizabeth Taylor Director: Brian Levant Producer: Bruce Cohen Screenplay: Tom S. Parker, Jim Jennewein, and Steven E. de Souza based on the Hanna/Barbera TV series Music: David Newman Released by Universal Pictures
Excerpts from an interview with Fred Flintstone:
JB: Fred, let's begin by talking a little about your reaction to Universal Pictures' big-screen version of THE FLINTSTONES.
FF: I think kids will like it, and maybe some grown-ups, too. It was...cute.
JB: That doesn't sound very enthusiastic.
FF: Frankly, I hoped for more. I mean, the special effects are pretty good, and the costumes and set design are impressive, but somehow those guys on the screen don't always seem like me and Barney.
JB: How so?
FF: The actor who plays Barney--Rick Moranis--isn't physically right for the part. Barney is short and stocky, but Rick is thin. Similar problem with Rosie O'Donnell as Betty, except in reverse. Betty is skinny; Rosie is ... not as skinny.
JB: How about John Goodman's performance as you? Some have said he's the perfect choice.
FF: (after a pause) He has the mannerisms right, and the level of energy, but he plays me a little too stupid. Now, I'm no genius or nothing, but I was never that dumb on TV. In fact, most of the time, I was the one with the "ideas."
JB: To me, Goodman seems to play you as a Jackie Gleason-type. That was intended, I'm sure, since the original FLINTSTONES was a takeoff on THE HONEYMOONERS.
FF: Yup. You know, when we heard there was going to be a major studio production of THE FLINTSTONES, both Barney and I auditioned.
JB: What happened?
FF: Except for a couple of cameos for me, we got turned down. Told that we were "too animated." Can you believe that? As if John Goodman--who is a fine actor for a real person--can improve on the original.
JB: How about Elizabeth Perkins as your wife?
FF: Her, I could believe. She has Wilma down to a "T." As for Elizabeth Taylor as her mother ... (shudders). The best line in the whole picture comes from her, though: "Wilma could have married Elliot Firestone, the man who invented the wheel. Instead, she married Fred Flintstone, the man who invented the excuse."
JB: Script-wise, how do you think the movie fares?
FF: You've heard the stories that there were thirty-two writers, right?
JB: Yes.
FF: It seems like it. The quality of the writing is a notch below that of our show. Most of the jokes aren't as witty, and the laughs come less frequently. Maybe it's because so many of the things they do in the movie are lifted directly from the show, but a lot of stuff seems stale.
JB: How about the plot? Something about a middle manager at Slate Construction, played by Kyle MacLachlan, and his secretary, played by Halle Berry, making you their dupe so they can get rich while you take the fall.
FF: Yeah. And in the process, I get such a swelled head that I forgot who my real friends are. Pretty standard stuff.
JB: Strictly from an entertainment perspective, how would you rate THE FLINTSTONES? Various critics have called it everything from "Yabba Dabba Don't" to "Yabba Dabba Doo-Doo."
FF: They're being a little harsh. As you know from watching the show, the Rubbles and us go to the drive-in a lot, so we know a thing or two about movies. THE FLINTSTONES isn't a great motion picture, and it's definitely not art, but it's fun in a silly sort of way. Maybe a little too long--Dino fell asleep halfway through- but not too bad. I'm a little surprised at the really vicious things people are saying.
JB: Thank you for your time, Fred. This has been an interesting conversation. If THE FLINTSTONES makes more than $100 million, we'll talk to you again when the inevitable sequel comes out.
