Starring: Julia Roberts, Nick Nolte, Saul Rubinek, James Rebhorn, Robert Loggia, Olympia Dukakis, Charles Martin Smith Director: Charles Shyer Producer: Nancy Meyers Screenplay: Nancy Meyers and Charles Shyer Cinematography: John Lindley Music: David Newman Released by Touchstone Pictures
I LOVE TROUBLE is a perfect example of a truly lightweight motion picture. With its preposterous plot and MTV-like camerawork, this movie survives--and occasionally even thrives--on the likeability of its performers and the unexpectedly frothy chemistry between them. This is a watchable film for those who don't expect or demand much from their summer entertainment.
Peter Brackett (Nick Nolte) has Chicago eating out of his hands. As the star columnist for THE CHICAGO CHRONICLE, he can recycle nine-year old pieces and still earn the plaudits of his numerous fans. Thanks to his newly-published detective novel WHITE LIES, Brackett is at the apex of his career. His life and job have become soft and easy--until Sabrina Peterson (Julia Roberts) comes along.
Peterson is only in her second day of work for THE CHICAGO GLOBE when she meets Brackett. Their rivalry starts almost immediately, with her scooping him. Thus begins a duel of one-upsmanship that leads to the pair entering into a tentative partnership in their pursuit of the ultimate story: who is behind the derailment of a train that caused five deaths, and why did they do it?
Taking this film at face value, one might be tempted to say that the mystery elements are merely plot devices around which to build the Peterson/Brackett relationship. This certainly seems to be the case early on. However, somewhere along the way, screenwriters Meyers and Shyer apparently decided that they had the makings of a decent thriller on their hands. As a result, far too much time is spent expanding upon an element of the plot that makes very little sense and has almost no audience appeal.
I LOVE TROUBLE ends up being about 30 minutes too long. The last half-hour especially drags, as the interaction between Brackett and Peterson is curtailed in favor of shoot-outs, chases, and a lot of idiotic exposition. We have yet another example of a villain holding a hero at gunpoint and gleefully explaining his entire crime.
When I LOVE TROUBLE is focusing on the interplay between Nolte and Roberts, it's generally enjoyable, despite some atrocious dialogue. A lot of the so-called "witty repartee" between the two principals ends up sounding horribly contrived. The actors, however, hold things together. They're like Bogart and Becall or Tracy and Hepburn sparring with each other good-naturedly, sexual tension crackling between them. Stick a pair of mismatched, marginal performers in the roles of Brackett and Peterson, and I LOVE TROUBLE might have been very, very bad.
Nolte rarely gives a subpar performance, and this is no exception as he lends the full force of his not inconsiderable talent into playing Brackett. Julia Roberts generally does her best work in lighter roles (even though it has elements of a thriller/mystery, I LOVE TROUBLE is, at heart, a romantic comedy), and her Peterson proves an apt foil for Brackett. The pair work well together, regardless of what they're doing or saying, and it's a credit to them both that they're able to overcome so many of the script's faults and still keep the audience interested.
Alas, screen charisma and chemistry can only get you so far, and that's the problem with this sort of film. The dubious premise is not well-executed, and the final product too often emphasizes its weaknesses rather than its strengths. The sad truth is that whenever I LOVE TROUBLE relies on something other than its two stars, it's in trouble.
