Starring: Tom Hanks, Robin Wright, Gary Sinise, Mykelti Williamson, Sally Field Director: Robert Zemeckis Producers: Wendy Finerman, Steve Tisch, and Steve Starkey Screenplay: Eric Roth based on the novel by Winston Groom Cinematography: Don Burgess Music: Alan Silvestri Released by Paramount Pictures
Ever find the grind of life getting you down? Is the day-to-day struggle threatening to drag you under? If so, there is a movie out there that can replenish your energy and refresh your outlook. FORREST GUMP has a perspective of life that is passionate, and an execution that's magical. This is a tonic for the weary of heart and spirit, and a rare gem in summer's crown. For those who feel that being set adrift in a season of action movies is like wandering into a desert, the oasis lies ahead.
Back when Tom Hanks' movie career was still relatively new, the actor made a film called BIG, which told the story of a young boy forced to grow up fast as a result of an ill-advised wish made at a carnival. In some ways, FORREST GUMP represents the antithesis of that earlier movie. In this case, the main character remains a child in heart and spirit, even as his body grows to maturity. Hanks is called upon yet again to play the innocent.
Forrest Gump (Hanks), named after a civil war hero, grows up in Greenbow, Alabama, where his mother (Sally Field) runs a boarding house. Although Forrest is a little "slow" (his IQ is 75, 5 below the state's definition of "normal"), his mental impairment doesn't seem to bother him, his mother, or his best (and only) friend Jenny Curran (played as an adult by Robin Wright). In fact, the naivete that comes through a limited understanding of the world around him gives Forrest a unique--and positive--perspective on life.
During the course of the next thirty years, Forrest becomes a star football player, a war hero, a successful businessman, and something of a pop icon. Through it all, however, there is one defining element in his life: his love for Jenny. She is never far from his thoughts, no matter what he's doing or where he is.
A trio of assets lift FORREST GUMP above the average "lifestory" drama: its optimism, freshness, and emotional honesty. Though the movie does not seek to reduce every member of the audience to tears, it has moments whose rare power comes from their simplicity. Equally as important is laughter, and FORREST GUMP has moments of humor strewn throughout.
During the 60s and 70s, no topic more inflamed the turbulent national consciousness than that of Vietnam and those who were sent overseas to fight. Forrest, as might be expected, has a unique view on his time spent there: "We took long walks and were always looking for this guy named Charlie." In this observation can be found the essence of the title character's nature.
Through the miracle of visual effects, Forrest gets to meet his fair share of famous people--George Wallace, Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon, and John Lennon. While the mixture of real footage of these notables with new images featuring Hanks is not a flawless process, the result is nevertheless reasonably effective.
In some ways, the tone of this film is reminiscent of that of FRIED GREEN TOMATOES. Story-wise, the two don't share much, but both have a similar "feel." The characters presented by both films possess a quality and depth which quickly endears them to the audience.
FORREST GUMP has several messages, some of which are less obvious than others. The most frequently recurring theme is an admonition not to give up on life. Why surrender when you don't know what lies ahead? By contrasting Forrest's life with the lives of those around him, and by showing how the passage of time brings solace to even the most embittered hearts, the movie underlines this point.
Tom Hanks won last year's Academy Award for PHILADELPHIA, but his performance here is more impressive. The Alabama accent may seem a little awkward at first, but it doesn't take long for the acting to dwarf the twang. The role is never overplayed, and Hanks has no difficulty creating a totally human character that is free of guile and deceit, and barely able to comprehend a concept like evil.
Robin Wright gives the best performance of her career, surpassing what she accomplished in THE PLAYBOYS. Looking and seeming like a younger Jessica Lange, she is believable as the object of Forrest's undying affection. Her interaction with Hanks is one of the movie's more subtle pleasures.
The real scene-stealer, however, is Gary Sinise. A renowned director and theatrical actor, Sinise is probably best known to film- goers for his portrayal of George in 1992's OF MICE AND MEN (which he also directed). In this movie, his Lieutenant Dan Taylor is multi- faceted and riveting. The passion and pain he brings to the middle portions of FORREST GUMP hold some of the weaker moments of the story together.
The soundtrack boasts a wide variety of sounds of the era--perhaps too wide a variety. Half the end credits seem to be music-related. Often, pop and rock songs can be useful in establishing a mood, but FORREST GUMP goes beyond that into the realm of overkill. There are sequences when the choice of music is inspired (the use of "Running on Empty" for Forrest's "long run" comes to mind), but the soundtrack could have used a little pruning.
Ultimately, however, any gripes that I have about FORREST GUMP are minor. This is a marvelous motion picture--a mint julep on a hot summer's afternoon. Don't get me wrong--I still love SPEED, but FORREST GUMP is an atypical Hollywood change-of-pace that's more than worth anyone's two-plus hours in a darkened theater.
