Starring: Jesper Salen, Stellan Skarsgard, Basia Frydman, Niclas Olund Director: Ake Sandgren Producer: Waldemar Bergendahl Screenplay: Ake Sandgren based on the novel by Roland Schutt Cinematography: Goran Nilsson Music: Bjorn Isfalt Released by Sony Pictures Classics In Swedish with subtitles
"Schutt's novel THE SLINGSHOT is brimming with ideas. The movie is my interpretation of what I felt when I read the book. That's always the way it is--a direct translation isn't possible. The world described in the book appeals to me...There is a terrific vitality in this story and an undertone of absurdity that really turned me on. The existential questions we formulate during prepubescence are important throughout our lives." - Ake Sandgren, writer/director of THE SLINGSHOT
It's interesting how almost every film out of Sweden evokes, in one way or another, impressions of Ingmar Bergman's work. THE SLINGSHOT is certainly not a Bergman-derivative--it's almost too lighthearted for that--but there are moments here and there when one could imagine something similar from the great director.
THE SLINGSHOT is a wonderful mix of tragedy, humor, and triumph. Set in the 1920s, it explores some of the difficult realities of growing up as a boy in Sweden, especially for someone like Roland (Jesper Salen), whose mother Zipa (Basia Frydman) is a Jew and whose father Fritiof (Stellan Skarsgard) is devout socialist. Roland is often the target of bullying and name-calling, but the resilient lad always seems to bounce back from whatever problems beset him, often in the most unexpected of ways. On one occasion when he needs money, Roland fashions slingshots out of scrap metal and condoms, then sells them to his schoolmates. Then there's the time when he has some fun with a few lice....
Over the past few years, there have been quite a number of coming- of-age stories (both foreign and domestic), from the nostalgic JACQUOT and the offbeat LEOLO to the endearing KING OF THE HILL. THE SLINGSHOT fits right into an open slot in this broad category, with its familiar tone applied to unique characters and situations.
THE SLINGSHOT successfully manages to navigate the turbulent waters of Roland's boyhood adventures as they turn from the absurd to the heartwrenching. Writer/director Ake Sandgren displays a deft hand in seamlessly melding drama and comedy. He also creates a series of rich screen personalities who could easily slip into comfortable stereotypes, but don't.
Take Fritiof, for example. At first, this man seems to be the typical "Swedish father figure"--someone who is stern, demanding, and distanced from his children. As THE SLINGSHOT progresses, however, we learn that there's a lot more to Fritiof than is initially evident, and his relationship with both his sons has more facets than might initially be supposed.
THE SLINGSHOT's lone failing comes when it skims across philosophical issues of existence. Perhaps because of the brevity with which they are examined, or maybe because they are introduced from the perspective of a ten-year-old, these themes seem out-of-place.
With a trio of formidable performances (by Salen, Skarsgard, and Frydman), THE SLINGSHOT offers a moving, intriguing look at the difficulties faced by one child set adrift in a sea of bigotry where his own resourcefulness is the key to survival. There's more to this film than is suggested by its apparently-simple story, and it's a tribute to the ability of Ake Sandgren and his cast that so much is realized.
