Starring: Kim Vithana, Jimmi Harkishin, Sarita Khajuria, Mo Sesay, Lalita Ahmed, Shaheen Khan Director: Gurinder Chadha Producer: Nadine Marsh-Edwards Screenplay: Meera Syal Cinematography: John Kenway Music: Craig Pruess, John Altman, and Kuljit Bhamra Released by First Look Pictures
Bhaji is an Indian snack food whose identity has been "Westernized" in the British Isles. Director Gurinder Chadha has chosen bhaji as a metaphor for the lives of the women in this, her first feature film. Although Indian by birth, the characters--especially those of the younger generation--have been in large part shaped by the culture of England, the country in which they live. BHAJI ON THE BEACH not only examines this cross-cultural conflict, but looks at sexism and the generation gap, as well.
There are so many stories that it's sometimes difficult to keep up with each one, especially in the beginning, when the characters are being introduced. If there's an obvious failing in Chadha's work, it's that she's too ambitious. She has a lot to say and, apparently, wants to say it all in one movie. The result is a controlled chaos that can, upon occasion, become confusing.
The main characters are three twenty-something Asian women who have grown up in England. There's Ginder (Kim Vithana), a young mother who is seeking a divorce from an abusive husband (Jimmi Harkishin), bringing scandal down on both families. Hasida (Sarita Khajuria) is a pre-med student engaged in a secret affair with Oliver (Mo Sesay), an African British man. This affair has resulted in an unexpected pregnancy that throws Hasida's entire future in turmoil, especially since Oliver won't commit to anything. Simi (Shaheen Khan), the third member of the trio, doesn't have a "story" of her own, but is instrumental in attempting to resolve everyone else's problems. She is the coordinator and the voice of reason.
There are other characters, as well. Asha (Lalita Ahmed) is a dutiful, middle-aged wife who is suffering from headaches and visions. There are a pair of teenagers looking to pick up white boys, and a geriatric lady who refuses to accept anything that threatens her strict, conservative views of morality.
All these women are participants in the "Saheli Asian Women's Group" outing to Blackpool. There, on the beach, each of these tales reaches some sort of crossroad.
Throughout much of the movie, Chadha keeps the tone light--a demanding task considering the amount of material she's juggling. The final fifteen minutes, which include an overload of melodrama and a shocking display of violence, are not as well directed as the previous eighty-five, and the mood is at variance with what came before. Like her creative idol, Ken Loach, the director attempts to blend gritty realism with natural comedy, but her success is qualified. She has an accurate grasp of the little details of life, but sometimes the broader strokes elude her.
For the most part, the characters are richly drawn, and this helps to maintain balance among the different stories. There aren't sequences in BHAJI ON THE BEACH where the action bogs down because we're waiting for the focus to shift. Admittedly, certain subplots, such as Hashida's relationship with Oliver, are better-presented than others, but nothing stands out as being obviously superior.
There's a line of dialogue in BHAJI ON THE BEACH that sums up the film: "It's not often that we women get away from the patriarchal demands made on us in our daily lives, struggling under the double yoke of racism and sexism." When Simi says this, she does so with a broad smile. It's a serious statement, but not one ponderously made. And that seems to be Chadha's view of filmmaking: explore themes, but let the philosophical issues blend into the story, not dominate it. If she continues to abide by this creed, it may not take many more films before she's turning out pictures to rival Loach's RIFF-RAFF and RAINING STONES.
