Starring: Justin, Rat, Alan Cumming, David Thewlis, Andrew Knott, Peter Davison Director: Caroline Thompson Producers: Robert Shapiro and Peter MacGregor-Scott Screenplay: Caroline Thompson based on the novel by Anna Sewell Cinematography: Alex Thomson Music: Danny Elfman Released by Warner Brothers
Even though it's eminently suitable for family viewing, the latest adaptation of Anna Sewell's BLACK BEAUTY could be a film in search for an audience. Adults may avoid this movie because it's G-rated, based on a children's book, and has actors speaking with British accents. Children, on the other hand, may stay away because there are no musical numbers with singing animals, no McDonald's Happy Meals, and actors who speak with British accents.
It's too bad, really, because BLACK BEAUTY is the best live-action family viewing to come along since last summer's THE SECRET GARDEN (also penned by screenwriter Caroline Thompson). In addition to John Sayles' as-yet-unreleased THE SECRET OF ROAN INNISH, both of these films represent a rarity in pictures oriented towards the younger crowd: intelligent stories that can captivate parents.
In many ways, BLACK BEAUTY is almost more of an adult movie than one for children. Restless kids are going to have difficulty sitting through several of the slower portions, and the overall tone is more somber than anything put out by Disney. Even THE LION KING, with its Shakespearean leanings, is ultimately lighter than BLACK BEAUTY.
Not the first adaptation of the classic story, Caroline Thompson's is the most faithful. Told from the perspective of Black Beauty (played by the stallion Justin, with a voice supplied by Alan Cumming), the film follows the horse's adventures as he serves masters both kind and cruel. It's a tale of friendship, abuse, betrayal, and redemption. The setting moves from the verdant pastures of rural England to the crowded streets of 19th-century London.
The supporting cast, which includes such notable names as David Thewlis (an up-and-coming actor whose credits include THE TRIAL, NAKED, and PRIME SUSPECT 3) and Peter Davison (a veteran who has been in at least three successful British television series--ALL CREATURES GREAT AND SMALL, DOCTOR WHO, and CAMPION), is almost redundant. The real stars of this film are the horses, and the humans, no matter how heartfelt their performances, are barely noticed.
Tremendous camerawork by Alex Thomson and an effective score from Danny Elfman (this sounds nothing like his Batman music) add to BLACK BEAUTY's luster. The film has the look and feel of something out of Dickens, with a theme to match.
Hopefully, BLACK BEAUTY will get the attention it deserves. THE SECRET GARDEN did, but that story is about humans, and the treatment received by INTO THE WEST makes one wonder how much horse tales appeal to the under-thirteen crowd (or, for that matter, the over-thirteen crowd). Regardless, this motion picture has a lot more to offer than the typically-available brainless family entertainment. It's worth the price of admission even if you don't have a kid to bring with you. Entertainment of this sort knows no age limits.
