Starring: Brendan Fraser, Steve Buscemi, Adam Sandler, Joe Mantegna, Michael McKean, Chris Farley, Ernie Hudson, Amy Locane, Nina Siemaszko Director: Michael Lehmann Producers: Robert Simonds and Mark Burg Screenplay: Rich Wilkes Cinematography: John Schwartzman Music: Carter Burwell Released by 20th Century Fox
When considering this movie, a word analogy comes to mind. FEAR OF A BLACK HAT is to CB4 as THIS IS SPINAL TAP is to AIRHEADS. Having said that, I can assure you that two of those films (BLACK HAT and SPINAL TAP) won't be mentioned again in this review. AIRHEADS isn't worth the comparison.
Observing how fertile the field of heavy metal music is for satire, it's disappointing to watch AIRHEADS bumble around, desperately trying to find something funny to say. Even sadder is the continuing nosedive of director Michael Lehmann's once-promising career. It's hard to believe that this is the same man who brought us the delicious black comedy HEATHERS (then again, he was also responsible for HUDSON HAWK).
The premise of AIRHEADS sounds promising. Three musicians of limited intelligence (Brendan Fraser, Steve Buscemi, and Adam Sandler) break into a radio station and hold the DJ (Joe Mantegna) and manager (Michael McKean) at gunpoint to get their demo played. Things go wrong, however, and when the police show up, the "Lone Rangers" have to take hostages. One problem, though. Their real-looking weapons are actually water pistols.
Despite a chuckle here and there, most of AIRHEADS isn't worth the film it was processed on. It requires an effort to avoid gritting one's teeth as obvious comic opportunities are allowed to pass by untouched. On the other hand, most of the jokes actually offered up by the script are either unfunny, obvious, or both. The overt stupidity of the three leads is amusing for a little while, but it doesn't take long for this trait to become tiresome.
AIRHEADS is not a good parody. Its comedy has no real edge, and consistently avoids risks. On those rare occasions when the film takes a stab at being outlandish, it is funny, but that doesn't happen too often. Most of the time, AIRHEADS flounders around trying--and failing--to be humorous. In that way, it's a lot like 1993's CB4, a rap parody that was more dumb than witty.
The cast contains some surprisingly good performers. Joe Mantegna is a respected name, but this is his second low-brow film in a row (BABY'S DAY OUT being the other). Steve Buscemi (of RESERVOIR DOGS) and Ernie Hudson also have roles. Brendan Fraser, the film's resident heartthrob, displays little comic timing.
It's hard to determine how much heavy-metal fanatics will enjoy this film, since the music isn't really the point. Then again, considering the confused nature of AIRHEADS, it's a little difficult to determine whether or not this film has a point. Anyway, regardless of who the target audience is, the filmmakers appear to have missed it. Considering the poor quality of the production in general, and the screenplay in particular, AIRHEADS appears to be an apt title.
