A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE is Steve Martin's re-telling of George Eliot's SILAS MARNER. This is not the first time Martin has coordinated a cinematic adaptation of a classic--his ROXANNE applied a modern twist to Edmond Rostand's CYRANO DE BERGERAC. However, whereas ROXANNE's appeal came through its affable mix of humor and light drama, A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE's uneven tone and poorly-crafted last act make it a far less successful effort. It's on the occasions when A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE strays some distance from SILAS MARNER that the film flounders most noticeably.
The story opens in 1979. Michael McCann (Martin) is in a state of nervous anticipation. His wife is pregnant and he's delighted--until she tells him that he's not the father. Four years later, Michael is living alone in a ramshackle house with painted-over windows. Since his divorce, he has become a sullen recluse who cares only about his ever- growing collection of gold coins. Gold, someone once told him, will never let you down. Not like human beings. Then, one night while he lies in a drunken stupor, a thief (Stephen Baldwin) breaks in and steals everything.
Not long after that, on a cold winter's evening, a child mysteriously appears in McCann's house, having wandered in out of the snow. Outside, her mother (Amelia Campbell) lies dead of a heroin overdose. McCann is unexpectedly touched by the little girl, and decides that fate has brought her to him to replace his lost coins. In a move that surprises everyone, he decides to adopt her. With the aid of local politician John Newland (Gabriel Byrne)--who happens to be the child's natural father but won't acknowledge her for fear of damaging his career--he is given custody of his daughter, whom he names Mathilda (played by a number of child actors, most notably Alana Austin).
Over the next decade, there is no more devoted a father than Michael McCann. Newland, however, is beginning to have second thoughts, especially since his wife Nancy (Laura Linney) can't have children. He makes it a point to get to know Mathilda, courting her favor by buying her expensive gifts. Eventually, when he feels the situation is ripe, he sues for custody.
The movie's limited strength lies in the bonding between 10-year old Mathilda and her father. There's a sense of genuine emotion in this relationship. Some of the scenes between the two display a lightheartedness that almost lifts A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE from the miasma that had settled around it during the overly-long introduction.
Unfortunately, Martin's script calls for more than the simple telling of how a man's love for a child changes his personality. Hence, we're subjected to court scenes featuring the attempts of the (nasty) Mr. Newland to take away the beloved daughter of the (nice) Mr. McCann. The premise is preposterous and the execution inept.
Like fellow comedian-turned-actor Robin Williams, Steve Martin has the ability to give a competent dramatic performance, especially when the role allows for a little comic relief. The problem with A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE is that the comedy is not well-blended with the drama. With a tone that wobbles like an unsteady top, this film leaves its lead actor floundering for a point of equilibrium.
Alana Austin's greatest asset is her charm. Her acting skills are certainly not well-honed, but her smile can file off a few rough edges. Thankfully, she's also not insufferably cute.
A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE is riddled with problems (the film's Labor Day weekend release indicates how uncertain Touchstone is about its appeal). It doesn't seem that anyone had a clear idea of what they wanted the film to be--a frothy dramatic comedy or a maudlin melodrama. Working from solid source material, it's amazing how disjointed the result is. SILAS MARNER is worthy of an update--just not this one.
Copyright 1994 James Berardinelli
