Date Released: 10/21/94 Running Length: 1:48 Rated: R (Violence, language, nudity, gross alien creatures)
Starring: Donald Sutherland, Eric Thal, Julie Warner, Keith David, Will Patton, Richard Belzer Director: Stuart Orme Producer: Ralph Winter Screenplay: Ted Elliott & Terry Rossio and David S. Goyer based on the novel by Robert A. Heinlein Cinematography: Clive Tickner Music: Colin Towns Released by Hollywood Pictures
This film must have given lead actor Donald Sutherland a sense of deja vu. After all, this isn't the first picture he's starred in about otherworldly beings coming to this planet and taking over human bodies. Unfortunately, his second exploration of the scenario isn't nearly as good as his first, 1978's creepy INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS.
THE PUPPET MASTERS tells a story of alien invasion. The creatures, which bear a remarkable resemblance to the face-suckers from the ALIEN movies, have come to Earth on a mission of conquest (at least that's the loose impression that the picture gives--it's not too concerned about motivation). They attach themselves to a victim's back, stick a probe in their neck, and take over their nervous system, in effect turning them into a puppet.
First contact comes in Ambrose, Iowa, a small town with a population of just over 10,000. The aliens multiply at an alarming rate, so it isn't long before the entire town is possessed and, like a disease, the infestation spreads rapidly. Called in to investigate are two members of the ultra-secret Office of Scientific Intelligence, the father-and-son team of Sam and Andrew Nivens (played by Eric Thal and Donald Sutherland, respectively). Joining them is exobiologist Mary Sefton (Julie Warner), who is "on loan" from NASA.
What they find in Ambrose is a hoax covering up the aliens' true plans. The race is then on as the U.S. government seeks to find a way to vanquish the invaders before the human race is overwhelmed.
Director Stuart Orme's film is fast-paced, apparently more concerned with the action elements of the story than the science fiction ones--not that these are neglected entirely. One of the most fascinating portions of THE PUPPET MASTERS involves an autopsy done on a creature. This scene has a sense of authenticity that is often missing from the rest of the largely comic book-style adventure.
Attempts at detailed characterization don't work particularly well, and there's a love story that feels as forced as it is superfluous--although even that isn't as unnecessary as the film's final ten minutes. The tactic of having a "second ending" (a technique that is used often, but rarely accomplished well) is misplaced in THE PUPPET MASTERS, especially since it includes the movie's only incident of obviously inferior visual effects work.
It's refreshing to have a human hero who seems to be on top of the situation. As portrayed by Donald Sutherland, Andrew Nivens is a man with a quick intelligence. He's his adversary's match, and only once does he get outmaneuvered or out-thought. In case of a real alien invasion, I'd want this guy on my team.
THE PUPPET MASTERS is not a science fiction classic, but it is solidly entertaining. The movie is not so cliche-riddled that is seems hopelessly familiar, nor is it burdened with a complex plot that requires an unpleasant exertion of brain power to unravel. As a Halloween season release, this movie delivers exactly what's most desired: cheap thrills.
