Initially released: 1955 Rerelease: Fall 1994 Running Length: 1:56 (restored version) Rated: No MPAA Rating (Violence, language, mature themes)
Starring: Simone Signoret, Vera Clouzot, Paul Meurisse, Charles Vanel Director: Henri-Georges Clouzot Producer: Henri-Georges Clouzot Screenplay: Henri Georges Clouzot, Jerome Geronimi, Frederic Grendel, and Rene Masson Cinematography: Armand Thirard Music: Georges Van Parys Released by Kino International In French with English subtitles
Floating around the art house circuit these days is a restored version of Henri-Georges Clouzot's 1955 murder mystery DIABOLIQUE. Easily overlooked because of its limited distribution, this is a picture that may demand some active searching to find. It is well worth the effort. With a plot as deliciously curvy and complex as any contemporary thriller, DIABOLIQUE is a masterpiece, and as accomplished as anything done by Hitchcock.
Unlike many noir thrillers, DIABOLIQUE takes as much time defining and refining its characters as developing its plot. By never taking things to excess, Clouzot forms a chillingly realistic presentation. There are moments of irreverent humor, but these are seamlessly incorporated so as not to disturb the overall tone. With its keen insight into the base aspects of human nature, DIABOLIQUE has a lot more to offer than a traditional entry into the genre.
The less said about the plot, the better, since any excess of detail is likely to afford an unwanted peek around one of DIABOLIQUE's many corners. In essence, this is the story of two women who conspire to murder one man. The intended victim is Michel Delasalle (Paul Meurisse), a despicable sort of person who abuses the women in his life while flaunting his mistress in front of his wife. The potential killers are Christina Delasalle (played by Vera Clouzot, the director's wife), the ailing, fragile wife; and Nicole Horner (Simone Signoret), the mistress who wears sunglasses to conceal her latest shiner.
The three leads all turn in impeccable performances. Paul Meurisse presents an entirely convincing portrayal of a man with no redeeming qualities. Michel Delasalle is the kind of person no one wants to know. In his position as director of a boarding school, he's the boys' worst nightmare. Nicole Horner is suitably no-nonsense as the practical mistress, and Vera Clouzot is more than credible as the wife who is equally repelled and enticed by the thought of killing her wretched husband.
Diabolically clever in construction with perfect pacing and a momentum that builds to the appropriate moment, this film is the sort of intelligent thriller that is difficult to find. The restored print, which includes several previously-trimmed scenes, is clean and crisp, making DIABOLIQUE every bit as enjoyable as Hollywood's best current offerings.
