Featuring the voices of Michelle Nicastro, Jack Palance, Sandy Duncan, Steven Wright, John Cleese, and Steve Vinovich Director: Richard Rich Producers: Richard Rich, Tom Tobin, and Terry Noss Screenplay: Richard Rich and Brian Nissen Music: Lex de Azevedo Lyrics: David Zippel Released by New Line Cinema
Richard Rich, creator of the new animated feature THE SWAN PRINCESS, is one of several animators to have bolted from Disney's fold to form his own company. Relying on the "old fashioned" technique of hand painting cels, Rich and his staff took over four years to produce this feature, and the quality of animation shows the effort. While not up to Disney standards, it's the next best thing available. Unfortunately, the same attention to detail lavished on the visuals wasn't applied to the story and songs.
Odette is the heir to one kingdom; Derek is the prince of another. Since childhood, their parents have encouraged a romance and, as the pair enters adulthood, the hoped-for marriage seems likely. Alas, the nefarious sorcerer Rothbart has other ideas, wanting Odette's hand--and kingdom--for himself. To these ends, he transforms the princess into a swan and keeps her prisoner in a lake outside his castle until she agrees to marry him. There, she can assume human form only under moonlight. All is not lost, however, as Odette's trio of animal friends--the frog Jean-Bob, turtle Speed, and puffin Puffin -- plot to restore her to her rightful position.
Much of THE SWAN PRINCESS is trite and uninspired--probably not the sort of thing that will bother younger viewers (for whom this is a good film)--but it may drive parents to distraction. Fortunately, there are always Odette's three friends to cut down on the relentlessly syrupy content. As voiced by John Cleese, Steven Wright, and Steve Vinovich, respectively, the frog, turtle, and puffin are the undisputed high points. Their presence offers not only comic relief, but a welcome level of energy that not even Jack Palance's gravel-voiced bad guy sorcerer can provide.
Songs, which have long been a critical element of animated movies, are second-rate at best in THE SWAN PRINCESS, with the key number, "For Longer than Forever" not even approaching some of the least memorable offerings in recent Disney films. Nothing presented here is likely to inspire toe-tapping or promote impromptu sing-alongs on the ride home from the theater, and children won't be flocking to stores to buy the soundtrack.
Nevertheless, despite its problems, THE SWAN PRINCESS is actually one of the better non-Disney animated productions to come along in a while. While the creators of BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, ALADDIN, THE LION KING, and POCAHONTAS need not feel threatened, parents looking for something different to take their offspring to might find something worthwhile here.
