Starring: Marcello Mastroianni, Luisina Brando, Alejandra Podesta Director: Maria Luisa Bemberg Producer: Oscar Kramer Screenplay: Maria Luisa Bemberg and Jorge Goldenberg based on a short story by Julio Llinas Cinematography: Felix Monti Music: Nicola Piovani Released by Sony Pictures Classics In Spanish with subtitles
"To make a film is always an adventure and a defiance. I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT is the riskiest of my films and also the one that taught me the most about myself.... Charlotte is a metaphor for all of us who are in one way or another different from the flock. In that sense ... she could be any independent spirit." - Maria Luisa Bemberg, director of I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT
There are many ways to deal with a child's disability. The least practical, and probably the most immature, is to deny that it exists, eradicate all reminders of it, and refuse to allow anyone to mention it. Which is exactly how Dona Leonor (Luisina Brando) reacts when she realizes that her daughter Charlotte (Alejandra Podesta) is a dwarf. Not only does she place the entire town of San Jose de los Altares under a gag rule, but she takes a pick ax to some local stone gnomes and burns copies of GULLIVER'S TRAVELS, SNOW WHITE, and TOM THUMB.
How to classify I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT is something of a mystery. The story is structured as a fractured fable, but contains elements of comedy, melodrama, and tragedy. Those determined to pigeonhole this movie into a specific genre are likely to be confounded; I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT isn't conventional enough for that sort of generic identification.
Everyone in the 1930s Argentinean community has their own vision of Charlotte. Her mother does everything she can to build the girl up and have her lead a "normal" life, including allowing what might at other times be considered a shockingly inappropriate marriage. Ludovico D'Andrea (Marcello Mastroianni), a local playboy with a fondness for collecting small things (he has a miniature pony and a tiny monkey) falls in love with her, in part because of her stature. Charlotte, on the other hand, is a very pragmatic young woman who doesn't mind acknowledging her shortcomings.
Even at its most poignant, the tone of I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT remains playful and romantic. The budding relationship between Ludovico and Charlotte, which could easily have turned into something satirical or uncomfortable, is handled with restraint and sensitivity. Incidents of frequently funny, offbeat humor are included to keep the audience off-balance. I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT is nothing if not unusual.
The trio of lead performers--the charismatic Mastroianni, the sultry Brando, and the charming Podesta--cement this movie in a solid foundation. These three handle every turn given to them by the script, and make even the most bizarre situations believable. Cinematographer Felix Monti chooses his shots effectively, suggesting a sense of magic- realism (the scenes outside on the benighted streets of San Jose de los Altares, photographed through a blue lens, are stunning).
I DON'T WANT TO TALK ABOUT IT has a lot of heart, and that's why its themes come across so clearly. As director Bemberg has admitted, this is not a story to be viewed from a logical perspective. Its mystical quality makes it a fairytale for adults, complete with a moral that each individual can interpret as it applies to him- or herself.
