Starring: Jason Scott Lee, Cary Elwes, Lena Headey, Sam Neill, John Cleese Director: Stephen Sommers Producers: Edward S. Feldman and Raju Patel Screenplay: Stephen Sommers and Ronald Yanover; story by Ronald Yanover & Mark D. Geldman based on characters from "The Jungle Book" by Rudyard Kipling Cinematography: Juan Ruiz-Anchia Music: Basil Poledouris Released by Walt Disney Pictures
For the most part, despite an impressive track record with animated films, Disney hasn't awed anyone with its recent live-action releases. Poorly-scripted, weakly-acted, and unaplogetically politically correct, these features have been more like cookie-cutter cinematic candy than anything worth consuming. Thankfully, THE JUNGLE BOOK represents something of an entirely different breed.
Beautifully photographed and tightly paced with a spate of solid performances, this latest Kipling-inspired motion picture is an enjoyable and exuberant film-going experience. Where Disney's animated JUNGLE BOOK was a light-hearted affair, this rendition is more of a straightforward adventure. That's not to imply that it's in any way stodgy or somber; comic relief is provided by an orangutan called King Louie and a human named John Cleese.
Taking place in late 19th-century, British-occupied India, THE JUNGLE BOOK's story is uncomplicated: a human boy who has grown up in the jungle is lured back to civilization by the sight of a beautiful young woman. There, surrounded by a few who wish to help him and many whose motives are less pure, he learns to speak and act like a man. Eventually, his enemies, motivated by jealousy, ill-will, and greed, drive him back into the wild. Once there, the battle for life becomes a struggle of man's guns against the Law of the Jungle.
Those familiar with the animated feature will recognize some non- human characters, including King Louie, Baloo the bear, Bagheera the panther, and, of course, Shere Khan, the tiger king. Mowgli, the "wild boy" of the Black Jungle, is portrayed by Jason Scott Lee. This performance, while not of award-winning caliber, is characterized by a number of nice little "man/beast" touches. Lena Headey, as Katherine, is the object of Mowgli's love, but she's engaged to a British officer (Cary Elwes) who kills wild animals for sport. Sam Neill plays Katherine's father, and John Cleese is the kindly Dr. Julius Plumford.
The most remarkable thing about THE JUNGLE BOOK is Juan Ruiz- Anchia's photography. With its striking shots of lush forests, cascading waterfalls, and catacomb-like treasure chambers, the movie is a visual feast. Nevertheless, THE JUNGLE BOOK rarely pauses to savor the scenery, moving instead with a pace that disallows opportunities for boredom.
There are moments when THE JUNGLE BOOK may be too intense for small children. Animal maulings, while shown obliquely, occur on screen. Those old enough not to be disturbed by such things should enjoy this movie, regardless of whether they consider themselves adults, kids, or something in-between. Disney isn't just courting the younger audience with this film, either. Jason Scott Lee's wardrobe, frequently limited to a loincloth, is designed to display his tanned, well-muscled body.
THE JUNGLE BOOK doesn't offer any thought-provoking philosophical messages, and its view of good and evil is simplistic (characters clearly fall into one category or the other), but that lack of complexity is part of its charm. This film proves that the company behind THE LION KING can create worthwhile entertainment regardless of whether the animals are real or illustrated.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily those of Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
