Date Released: varies Running Length: 1:30 Rated: No MPAA Rating (sex, brief nudity, language, mature themes) Released by Strand Releasing
It's a measure of the quality (or lack thereof) of lesbian and gay-themed films that BOYS LIFE can be considered one of the better entries. What separates this from many similar productions is that the trio of short movies comprising BOYS LIFE is unpretentious, unaffected, and non-preachy. On the other hand, each is hampered by a decidedly mundane storyline, and none approaches the kind of low-budget, high-energy exuberance that distinguished GO FISH.
All three of the BOYS LIFE shorts concentrate on the tribulations of teenagers coming to grips with their homosexuality in a world that defines anything non-hetero as "abnormal." Unfortunately, the tales are so similar in content and intent that by the third one, you feel like you're watching a re-run. The protagonists in particular are clones--smart, insecure, and looking for love.
Each story has its high and low points, but the most damning argument against BOYS LIFE is that its only standout characteristics are the use of gay protagonists and the treatment of this sexual preference as something natural (rather than a disease). Plot-wise, however, the stories come across as shallow, predictable, and choked with cliches. For those in search of the "definitive gay film experience", BOYS LIFE doesn't provide it.
"Pool Days"
Running Time: 0:29 Director: Brian Sloan Writer: Brian Sloan Featuring: Josh Weinstein, Nick Poletti, Kimberly Flynn
"Pool Days" is the most natural-seeming of the BOYS LIFE stories, but it's also the one with the lowest production values. Despite relaxed performances by Josh Weinstein (as the troubled teen Justin) and Nick Poletti (as his older would-be gay mentor Russell), the short has a number of glaring problems, not the least of which is a cringingly bad acting job by Kimberly Flynn.
The story takes place during the summer between Justin's junior and senior years in high school. To make some cash, he takes a job as a lifeguard/janitor at an upscale health club. While there, he becomes troubled by his reactions to the flesh exposed in the all-male locker rooms and saunas. When a tryst with a female fellow employee ends disastrously, Justin turns to one of the club's clients, the older and self-assured Russell, for support and instruction.
"A Friend of Dorothy"
Running Time: 0:31 Director: Raoul O'Connell Writer: Raoul O'Connell Featuring: Raoul O'Connell, Kevin McClatchy, Ann Zupa
"A Friend of Dorothy" is the least original of trio, relying almost entirely on formula situations and stock characters. Although writer/director/actor Raoul O'Connell invests his Winston with a certain wry charm, there's nothing special about his personality, or that of anyone else populating this film. The story, plain and simple, is about a young gay man going to college and trying to figure out how to get a date.
The lack of believable conflict and unforced drama is a real drawback to "A Friend of Dorothy." There are scenes that point to O'Connell as having some talent as a director, but his scenario lasts too long, and the resolution is facile and predictable. The story of the insecure teen trying to find that "special person" is as worn out a Hollywood staple as exists.
"The Disco Years"
Running Time: 0:30 Director: Robert Lee King Writer: Robert Lee King Featuring: Matt Nolan, Gwen Welles, Russell Scott Lewis
The title "The Disco Years" is a play on THE WONDER YEARS, although about the only element the two have in common is a voice-over narrative. Attempts by this production to capture the feel of the seventies fall flat and, with the exception of a few gratuitous dance scenes, the whole story could easily have transpired during the eighties or nineties.
Nevertheless, "The Disco Years" is the most ambitious effort in BOYS LIFE, confronting such issues as homophobia and harassment. It's not always successful--a scene with the protagonist (Tom, played by Matt Nolan, a Robert Sean Leonard look-alike) confronting his mother (Gwen Welles) about his sexuality is unconvincing. During her two-minute rant, she spouts every cliche from "You can't be!" to "What did I do wrong??" Tom's sanctuary becomes a local gay discotheque where he can let loose and just "be himself."
And that sense of individuality is, after all, the point of all three BOYS LIFE tales. Too bad the stories framing the message aren't more entertaining.
