U.S. Availability: Winter 1994-95 limited release Running Length: 1:38 MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, sex, nudity, violence)
Starring: Albert Finney, Brenda Fricker, Rufus Sewell, Tara Fitzgerald, Michael Gambon, Patrick Malahide, David Kelly Director: Suri Krishnamma Producer: Jonathan Cavendish Screenplay: Barry Devlin Cinematography: Ashley Rowe Music: Julian Nott Released by Sony Pictures Classics
As it turns out, the only thing of real importance in A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE is Albert Finney's performance. His turn as bus conductor Alfie Byrne is yet another extraordinary credit to add to an already- impressive resume. The man who played Tom Jones in the 1960s has matured into one of the best character actors of the 1990s, with memorable appearances in such films as THE PLAYBOYS, RICH IN LOVE, and THE BROWNING VERSION. Even when these movies had little to offer, Finney's presence was a saving grace.
When he's not entertaining his regular passengers with readings of Oscar Wilde, Alfie is a would-be director who delights in putting on not-so-successful amateur productions. In the past, he has been known for doing "The Importance of Being Earnest", but this time around, Alfie has chosen to attempt "Salome." This decision is crystalized when he finds the perfect choice for the title role--an enchanting young woman named Adele (Tara Fitzgerald) who wanders on his bus one day.
But Alfie's personal life isn't nearly as joyful as his public personae might lead others to believe. Despite attempts by his sister (Brenda Fricker) to find him a wife, Alfie steadfastly resists the idea, primarily because women don't interest him. However, the only one to whom he has openly admitted his homosexuality (or "the love that dare not speak its name," as Wilde called it) is himself. In Alfie's world of 1963 Dublin, tolerance for gays is in short supply.
If A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE is anything other than a nicely-detailed portrait of one unfulfilled middle-aged Dubliner, it's about the value of friendship. Although Alfie never finds the love for which he so desperately searches, he discovers a far more valuable commodity. In Adele, he uncovers someone else who hides a secret. The two are kindred spirits and there are times when their interaction has a closeness that lovers often strive for. Then there's the driver of Alfie's bus, a young man named Robbie (Rufus Sewell), to whom Alfie is attracted. Because Robbie is straight, Alfie never reveals his feelings, choosing instead to pursue a platonic friendship.
Perhaps the most glaring flaw A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE is the weakness of the framing storyline. Alfie is such an interesting character that he deserves a more original plot. A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE takes only "safe" risks, avoiding reaching for something new or groundbreaking. There's a familiarity to the material, and only so much an accomplished actor can do with the script.
"The only way to get rid of temptation is to yield to it," wrote Oscar Wilde, but when Alfie tries to apply this lesson, the results are--to put it mildly--unfortunate. That life cannot be lived without risk and failure is certainly one of A MAN OF NO IMPORTANCE's more emphatic messages. And it's the choice of Albert Finney far more than any other element of the production that allows this aspect of the movie--as well as others--to succeed.
