U.S. Availability: wide release 5/12/95 Running Length: 1:52 MPAA Classification: R (Sexual situations, profanity) Theatrical aspect ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Marisa Tomei, Alfred Molina, Anjelica Huston, Chazz Palminteri, Trini Alvarado Director: Mira Nair Producers: Michael Nozik and Lydia Dean Pilcher Screenplay: Robin Swicord based on the novel by Christine Bell Cinematography: Stuart Dryburgh Music: Alan Silvestri U.S. Distributor: The Samuel Goldwyn Corporation
The premise for THE PEREZ FAMILY offers the potential for a fairly light, somewhat quirky romantic comedy. Unfortunately, this production has difficulty converting that potential into something substantial. There are numerous difficulties that even the deft hand of director Mira Nair (MISSISSIPPI MASALA) can't completely overcome. To her credit, she manages to milk some entertainment value out of a script that stumbles around trying to find an emotional focus.
The story, which takes place in 1980, centers on Juan Raul Perez (Alfred Molina), a Cuban political prisoner who is released from jail after twenty years and sent to the Florida Keys along with hundreds of his countrymen. Also in the refugee group is a sugar cane worker and sometimes-prostitute named Dottie Perez (Marisa Tomei), who decides that if she and Juan pretend they're married, they can find a U.S. sponsor more quickly (families are placed before singles, and the larger the family, the faster the placement). However, since Juan already has a real wife (Anjelica Huston) and daughter (Trini Alvarado) in America (neither of whom knows he has arrived), he's reluctant to go along with the charade, but that doesn't stop Dottie. After convincing everyone that Juan is her husband, she sets out to recruit a "father-in-law" and "son", going to any lengths necessary to escape the confines of the Orange Bowl, which, as the refugee holding area, has become a virtual prison.
The casting choices here are extremely strange. Alfred Molina, an accomplished English actor, seems somewhat out-of-place as the brooding romantic lead. Anjelica Huston is even worse as Carmela, Juan Raul's wife. She's a bit too cool for this hot-blooded role, and her scenes with her Federal officer boyfriend, played by Chazz Palminteri, lack even the barest semblance of chemistry. Marisa Tomei is probably the best of the bunch, but that's because everything about her character is so over the top: the sensuality, the accent, and the delivery. Tomei breezes across the screen with an explosion of energy.
The script could have used a little tightening. Subplots (like one involving Carmela's over-protective brother) meander and it takes a long time to get to the unnecessarily-contrived conclusion. Even then, there's still a protracted denouement needed to get everyone with the "proper" partner. Along the way to this conclusion, we never develop much feeling for the characters. Too often, they come across as stereotypes and caricatures rather than real people.
Nevertheless, there's still something fascinating about THE PEREZ FAMILY. Perhaps it's the way it weaves in elements of the American/Cuban culture conflict, or maybe it's the none-too-subtle jabs at the disorganized, easily-manipulated immigration process. Whatever the case, this film offers some nice touches, both of the comic and dramatic variety, and when things work -- which they do sporadically -- it's usually because of these elements.
If nothing else, THE PEREZ FAMILY can be described as "colorful." Like Tomei's Dottie, it's often bold and brash. This technique of film making is good for upbeat moments (like a disco scene), but far less effective when the mood turns serious. Ultimately, however, it's this enthusiastic style, coupled with a real appreciation of details, that just barely keeps THE PEREZ FAMILY from sinking without a trace into romantic comedy obscurity.
