U.S. Availability: limited release 5/95 Running Length: 1:33 MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, mature themes) Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Kevin Spacey, Frank Whaley, Michelle Forbes Director: George Huang Producers: Steve Alexander and Joanne Moore Screenplay: George Huang Cinematography: Steven Finestone Music: Tom Hiel U.S. Distributor: Trimark Pictures
If Robert Altman's THE PLAYER taught film makers one lesson, it's that it's hip to satirize Hollywood. There have been a lot of recent motion pictures cashing in on this theme, with varying degrees of success. SWIMMING WITH SHARKS, the latest entry, tries a slightly different tactic than most of these other movies--instead of focusing on writers prostituting their talent, George Huang's picture looks at corporate ladder climbing within a fictional production studio.
Kevin Spacey, in a performance that must be seen to be appreciated, plays Buddy Ackerman, the nastiest executive in the movie business. Aside from rarely showing a trace of humanity, Buddy loves to shout, insult, and generally demean everyone under him, and since he's the Senior Executive Vice President of Production, there are a lot of people in that category. Spacey plays the role with relish, managing somehow to retain the skeleton of a legitimate character in what was written as a pure caricature. Far more credit goes to the actor than to the script for Ackerman's nasty, vicious flair.
If Buddy is the boss from hell, Frank Whaley's Guy is the poor sod who has to serve his every whim. Personal Assistant to Ackerman might be the first step up the corporate ladder, but it's a pretty dismal place to start. In this position, you're not supposed to think, just please and pamper the man who signs your checks. And that's what Guy does, day in and day out, until he finally snaps. What follows is like a variation on DEATH AND THE MAIDEN, with Guy tying Buddy up, then subjecting him to a verbal and physical barrage.
Somewhere along the way, SWIMMING WITH SHARKS loses its direction. What starts as a biting, and often effective, satire turns into a dramatic look at the dehumanizing effects of losing one's hopes and dreams. The split focus doesn't really work. Not only is it disconcerting to watch a funny movie turn suddenly grim, but Whaley's character doesn't have the necessary depth for us to believe the transformation he supposedly undergoes--a transformation that is key to accepting the conclusion.
SWIMMING WITH SHARKS contains some tremendous scenes. Most of these are early in the film, before it takes its bleak detour. Certain comments about Hollywood are scathing, pointed, and hilarious. Unfortunately, there doesn't seem to be enough material here to satisfy a full length feature, and the movie, which starts with such promise, begins to drag around its midpoint. From then on, despite a few brief rallies, the script never regains its early momentum or clarity, and, by the closing credits, SWIMMING WITH SHARKS is just treading water.
