(Part of the Series ALL THE BOYS AND GIRLS IN THEIR TIME)
RATING (0
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema Running Length: 0:59 MPAA Classification: Not Rated (Mature themes)
Cast: Circe, Julien Rassam, Joelle Cohen, James Brown Director: Chantal Akerman Screenplay: Chantal Akerman Cinematography: Raymond Fromont Distribution unknown In French with subtitles
ALL THE BOYS AND GIRLS IN THEIR TIME is a series of films commissioned by the French-German TV station Arte. Ten directors were asked to participate by making a movie about their teenage years. Each film had to include at least one party scene which highlighted the music of the time. PORTRAIT OF A YOUNG GIRL AT THE END OF THE 1960S IN BRUSSELS, Chantal Akerman's entry, takes place in April of 1968 and, as the title states, occurs on the streets of Brussels. Aside from a few supporting figures, there are really only two characters: Michelle, a thoughtful teenage loner who has given up school, and Paul, a guy she meets in a movie theater.
Like Richard Linklater's BEFORE SUNRISE, this movie is about two people walking around a European city, getting to know one another. Some of the subjects of conversation here even match those of Linklater's picture. However, while SUNRISE is a love story, PORTRAIT is something less romantic. It's about two people learning the other's secrets, but never really connecting. Michelle is a lonely, morose person who, by her own admission, hates having fun. "Even when I'm happy," she says, "I'm in pain, but I never show it." Paul, on the other hand, is eager to soothe her, but it's rare that she lets him within arm's distance.
Akerman, known for extremely slow-moving character dramas, speeds up the pace a little here, although this film certainly doesn't fly by. Nevertheless, during the one-hour running time, we get to know both Michelle and Paul, and are given an opportunity to ponder the subjects that arise during their rambling discussions. Michelle is an especially fascinating person, and perhaps the most refreshing aspect of PORTRAIT is that it allows us to spend time with her without foisting distracting plot complications upon us. Akerman has painted just what the title suggests -- a portrait for all who enjoy a slow-paced, leisurely look at a select character and her circumstances.
