United States, 1995 U.S. Availability: general release 7/14/95 Running Length: 1:40 MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, brief nudity) Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Steven Segal, Eric Bogosian, Katherine Heigl, Morris Chestnut, Everett McGill, Kurtwood Smith Director: Geoff Murphy Producers: Steven Segal, Arnon Milchan, and Steve Perry Screenplay: Richard Hatem & Matt Reeves Cinematography: Robbie Greenberg Music: Basil Poledouris U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
Back in 1992, there was a thriller about a cook aboard a Navy vessel who got stuck with the job of stopping a bunch of generic terrorists. All-in-all, the film wasn't great, but sizable portions were redeemed by the wonderfully over-the-top performance of Tommy Lee Jones. Of course, the good guy was played by Steven Segal, the macho man with the frozen expression. Now, for a reason that has more to do with Segal's ego than a creative impulse, the unsuspecting action-loving public has just had UNDER SIEGE 2 foisted upon it. Those that thought DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE was a disappointment had better be prepared for the worst.
Of course, it's a well-known fact that Segal can't act (or direct, for that matter; however, I'll leave ON DEADLY GROUND out of this), but he's far from the only thing wrong with this sorry excuse for a sequel. >From start to finish, the script is stupid, the direction is spotty, the editing is choppy, and the special effects make DOCTOR WHO's notoriously cheesy visuals look like flawless masterpieces. This movie is putrid.
Back from UNDER SIEGE is ex-SEAL operative Casey Ryback (Segal), the man who cooks with one hand while defeating bad guys with the other. This time, he's on a train trip with a pretty niece (Katherine Heigl, turning in a performance as bland as the one from MY FATHER THE HERO). There's been a family tragedy (Casey's brother is dead), but the details are glossed over because the introduction has already begun to drag. Meanwhile, a nutcase named Travis Dane (Eric Bogosian) has taken over a super-secret, invincible weapons satellite and, after devastating China with a blast, he turns it on Washington D.C. Needing a mobile base of operations, Travis and his henchmen decide to take over the train Casey's on, so that's where the so-called action takes place. This mostly consists of Segal running through lots of empty train cars, finding inept bad guys and either stabbing them, blowing their heads off, or throwing them from the train.
As a villain, Eric Bogosian lacks a certain panache. To his credit, the actor tries to foam at the mouth and do all the other requisite things necessary for the audience to hiss at him, but he just doesn't manage it. Everett McGill (TWIN PEAKS) as his sidekick isn't much better. As far as villains go, these guys don't have it. They're boring. Who cares that they intend to kill 8 million people?
During the course of the film, there are three incidents when our stalwart hero seems to be in a little bit of trouble, but terrible visual effects make these more amusing than tense. And then there's the big, joyous conclusion, complete with applause -- talk about cornball. This makes SCENT OF A WOMAN's grand finale look restrained. The whole production might have made a wonderfully campy ride if director Geoff Murphy hadn't taken things so seriously.
I have come to the conclusion that it's impossible for a Steven Segal movie to be anything better than mediocre, and this particular travesty may be his worst yet. The title UNDER SIEGE is supposed to represent the situation faced by Segal's character, but it's equally appropriate in describing the experience of the poor viewer who sits through this film.
