Cast: Julia Roberts, Robert Duvall, Dennis Quaid, Gena Rowlands, Kyra Sedgewick, Brett Cullen, Haley Hull Director: Lasse Hallstrom Producers: Anthea Sylbert and Paula Weinstein Screenplay: Callie Khouri Cinematography: Sven Nykvist Music: Hans Zimmer and Graham Preskett U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
Even though it's being marketed as a romantic comedy, SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT is really concerned with the relationships of two generations of fathers and daughters. This ordinary motion picture doesn't break any new ground as it compares and contrasts the interactions between Grace (Julia Roberts) and her domineering father, Wyle (Robert Duvall), with those of her daughter, Caroline (Hayle Hull), and her husband, Eddie (Dennis Quaid). To add something of a little more interest, marital infidelity is thrown into the mix. This forms the basis for a romance by presenting an excuse for Eddie to focus his efforts on winning Grace back.
All this action takes place against the backdrop of a grand prix horse jumping contest, the inclusion of which doesn't generate the same kind of audience interest that a more glamorous sporting event (like figure skating) might. Most of the horse-related stuff is either superfluous, boring, or both. Equestrians might disagree, but they're likely to be in the minority.
One of the more obvious drawbacks to SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT is that lead actress Roberts has lost the sparkle she exhibited in such hits as PRETTY WOMAN and SLEEPING WITH THE ENEMY. Here, she's flat, frequently eclipsed by the fiery, feisty performance of Kyra Sedgewick, who plays Grace's sharp-tongued sister, Emma Rae. Roberts' scenes with Quaid sputter when they should sizzle. There's only one sequence -- an inspired dance number -- when these two generate any sparks, and it doesn't last nearly long enough.
The film tries to develop a three-dimensional Grace by exploring her relationships with her mother (Gena Rowlands), father, sister, daughter, and philandering husband. The problem is that none of these interactions turn out to be particularly interesting. Dramatically, they are tired retreads of similar things done better in other movies. At least there are a few funny-to-hilarious moments that save this film from being a complete waste of time.
Robert Duvall does far from his best job here. His is basically a "mail it in" performance, but, considering the script he's working from, it's no wonder. SOMETHING TO TALK ABOUT is weary -- every ounce of energy and originality has long since been wrung out of this formula, and the "twist" of having the leads already married doesn't do much to spice up things. Ultimately, this "something" turns out to be nothing much at all.
