Cast: Schuyler Fisk, Rachael Leigh Cook, Larisa Oleynik, Bre Blair, Tricia Joe, Ellen Burstyn, Brooke Adams, Peter Horton Director: Melanie Mayron Producers: Jane Startz and Peter O. Almond Screenplay: Dalene Young based on the books by Ann M. Martin Cinematography: Wally Kurant Music: David Michael Frank U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
The summer of 1995 has been a good season for so-called family films. A number of features aimed primarily at children have held their own with a more mature crowd. THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB, Melanie Mayron's movie based on the popular books by Ann M. Martin, is not a member of that category. Unlike THE LITTLE PRINCESS, POCAHONTAS, THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD, and BABE, this particular motion picture is unlikely to grab the attention of anyone much past their pre-teen years.
The baby-sitters of Stoneybrook have banded together to form a club. Seven strong, they work like an agency, receiving calls from clients and handing out assignments to their select members. In the words of Kristy (impressive newcomer Schuyler Fisk), the club's founder, "We're more than just a club -- we're friends -- best friends. And nothing will ever change that." Of course, the minute she utters those words, everyone in the audience knows that something's going to happen this particular summer to try.
Character development is virtually non-existent, with the personalities of seven girls, three boys, and a few adults being painted with the broad strokes that define stereotypes. They're all here: the tomboy, the put-upon best friend, the dreamy California girl, and the worldly New York transplant. Each has at least one story all to herself. One's having problems with a boyfriend, another's forging a friendship with an older woman (played by Ellen Burstyn), and a third is trying to cope with the sudden return of her long-lost father (Timothy Horton). All-in-all, the months between June and August are very busy for the inhabitants of this film.
Ultimately, this looks and feels like a made-for-TV movie or an after school special. The direction by THIRTYSOMETHING cast member Mayron is unimaginative, and the script recycles all kinds of cliched situations and facile solutions. For the most part, THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB wants to teach its viewers the value of friendship, but the message comes across with sledgehammer subtlety in the midst of a sickeningly- sweet shower of goodwill. This is too much like a '90s version of THE BRADY BUNCH.
Some will argue that I'm being too hard on THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB. It is, after all, likely to work for the niche it's aimed at. On a more objective basis, though, the film doesn't succeed as a comedy, fantasy, or drama. Fans and would-be fans of Ann M. Martin's books may be enthralled, but, for the rest of us, THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB is something of an endurance contest.
