Cast: Steven Weber, Michael T. Weiss, Patrick Stewart, Bryan Batt, Sigourney Weaver, Nathan Lane Director: Christopher Ashley Producers: Mark Balsam, Mitchell Maxwell, and Victoria Maxwell Screenplay: Paul Rudnick based on his play Cinematography: Jeffrey Tufano Music: Stephen Endelman U.S. Distributor: Orion Classics
JEFFREY is a gay romantic comedy with a very impressive laugh-to- running time ratio. Written by ADDAMS FAMILY scribe Paul Rudnick (based on his play of the same name), this film is about as eccentric and quirky as they get. Rudnick throws everything at the viewer except the kitchen sink, and if he'd been able to find a way to get that in, he probably would have included it. And, despite all the mirth and mayhem, deep within JEFFREY's core is a message everyone can relate to, regardless of their sexual orientation.
JEFFREY is politically incorrect and proud of it. It dares to joke about AIDS and poke fun at the closet gay tendencies of certain Catholic priests. It revels in stereotypes, using numerous supposedly characteristic gay mannerisms and occupations, then turning them upside down by revealing "real" people underneath. In no small part due to a tremendous performance by Patrick Stewart, one such caricature, an interior designer, becomes someone we come to feel for.
Jeffrey (Steven Weber) is a sexually compulsive, young, gay man. After a number of bizarre in-bed experiences, he decides to give up sex cold turkey. It's not an easy decision to begin with, but it becomes almost impossible when he meets Steve (Michael T. Weiss) at a gym. Jeffrey is immediately attracted to Steve, but his current celibate state makes a relationship difficult. However, Steve is patient, and it doesn't take long before Jeffrey starts to weaken. Then the bombshell is dropped -- Steve is HIV+. At first, Jeffrey says it doesn't matter, but he's lying, and the moment he cancels a dinner date, Steve knows too.
JEFFREY never attempts to simulate real life. It's filled with asides to the audience, strange interludes (including a faux game show and a ghostly hospital encounter), and parodies of parodies. One hilarious segment has Sigourney Weaver playing "the nation's hottest post-modern evangelist." Another has Jeffrey talking frankly about sex to his mother and father. Then there's Nathan Lane as a randy priest who tries to seduce Jeffrey before breaking into a chorus of "Everything's Coming Up Roses." If nothing else, Rudnick and director Christopher Ashley know how to keep the audience off balance and in stitches.
One of the real treats of JEFFREY is watching accomplished thespian Patrick Stewart, who is in top form as Sterling, one of Jeffrey's best friends. Michael T. Weiss is equally strong as Steve, and Bryan Batt plays Sterling's AIDS-infected lover, Darius, with the appropriate mix of charm and ditziness. Acting-wise, unfortunately, the weak link is lead Steven Weber (from TV's WINGS), an actor with solid comic instincts, but who can't handle drama. This becomes a distinct liability as the film progresses, because after the riotous first forty-five minutes, JEFFREY wanders into the realm of the serious. Weber's limitations become especially apparent when he's placed in a dramatic scene opposite Stewart.
You don't have to dig too deeply to find JEFFREY's simple message, which is essentially the same as the one put forth by 1992's STRICTLY BALLROOM: "A life lived in fear is a life half-lived." The AIDS epidemic has scared Jeffrey, and now he's not only hiding from his own sexuality, but from life in general. Darius, despite being mortally ill, describes Jeffrey as the saddest person he's ever known and offers this advice: "Hate AIDS, Jeffrey, not life." Ultimately, this is the point of JEFFREY, and it's what makes this film more than just a laugh-a-minute riot.
