Cast: Mike McGlone, Edward Burns, Jack Mulcahy, Connie Britton, Shari Albert, Maxine Bahns, Jennifer Jostyn, Elizabeth P. McKay Director: Edward Burns Producer: Dick Fisher and Edward Burns Screenplay: Edward Burns Cinematography: Dick Fisher Music: Seamus Egan U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
Love, passion, and Irish Catholicism collide in THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN, writer/director Edward Burns' feature debut. This is one of the better independent romantic comedies to come along in a while. Although it generally stays true to the cliches and plot turns of the genre, THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN is smart and honest rather than manipulative. Instead of resorting to hard-to-swallow story complications, this film stays on-target from its opening moments. Along the way, the empty dialogue too often incipient in this sort of picture is replaced by intelligent, insightful conversations.
One of THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN's top assets is the brothers themselves. Despite their flaws (and each has a reasonably obvious one), Patrick (Mike McGlone), Jack (Jack Mulcahy), and Barry (Edward Burns) are likeable guys. They drink beer together, reminisce none-too-fondly about their dead father, and discuss topics ranging from true love to whether there's a hell.
Patrick, the youngest, has just graduated from college and is getting cold feet about the prospect of spending the rest of his life with his Jewish girlfriend, Susan (Shari Albert). He thinks he loves her, but he's not *in love* with her, and he yearns for something more romantic. On top of that, Patrick is saddled with the usual Catholic guilt inherent in a relationship -- especially one that involves pre-marital sex -- with a non-Catholic. But is this a genuine concern, or just an excuse to avoid commitment?
Jack, the oldest, is happily married to Molly (Connie Britton), the love of his life. But, as her maternal instincts assert themselves, Jack's eye begins to roam. Waiting to seduce him is Ann (Elizabeth P. McKay), a woman who's interested only in sex, not a relationship, and has decided that the best way to get what she wants is to become involved with a married man.
Barry, the middle brother, is the most cynical of the three. ("Being a pessimist," he says, "makes it easier to deal with my inevitable failure.") A screenwriter on the verge of a big breakthrough, Barry goes from relationship to relationship without ever finding love. For him, marriage is out of the question, and whenever a woman mentions the possibility of something long-term, Barry is out the door. Then he meets Audrey (Maxine Bahns), and suddenly nothing is quite so clear-cut.
If this film was only about the three men and their relationships, it would be enjoyable, but not particularly noteworthy. However, Burns has given his characters a slew of interesting things to say, and he hasn't reduced the women to pawns in male-centered romantic fantasies. In fact, in THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN, the female halves of the relationships are often smarter and hipper than their male counterparts. When one of the brothers thinks he's putting something over on his wife/girlfriend/lover, he's more likely just fooling himself.
In many closely-knit Irish American communities, as in many Italian American communities, Catholicism is more of a culture than a religion, and THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN explores the differences between accepting Catholic doctrine as a way of life and simply calling oneself "Catholic." Of the brothers, only Patrick is especially religious, and he's a perfect example of the adage "You can't be Catholic and have a healthy sex life." Barry and Jack accept their heritage, but, if they even believe in God, they don't show it. Yet even Barry is concerned about dating a non-Catholic woman.
Despite its occasional forays into weighty matters, THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN largely stays on the light side, where all good romantic comedies reside. The tone is upbeat and the script is laced with wit and, upon occasion, there are moments guaranteed to cause deeper, louder laughter. Barry's comparison of relationships to peeling and slicing a banana is the movie's comic highlight. Above all, THE BROTHERS MCMULLEN is undeniably charming, and that's the best reason to spend ninety-seven minutes with these men. You don't have to be Catholic, or Irish, or even American, to "get it." Burns' language, despite originating on Long Island, is universal in appeal and meaning.
