Cast: Josh Hamilton, Olivia D'Abo, Chris Eigeman, Parker Posey, Jason Wiles, Carlos Jacott, Carla Buono, Eric Stoltz, Elliot Gould Director: Noah Baumbach Producer: Joel Castleberg Screenplay: Noah Baumbach based on a story by Noah Baumbach and Oliver Berkman Cinematography: Steven Bernstein Music: Phil Marshall U.S. Distributor: Trimark Pictures
If we're to believe the movies, members of the so-called Generation X are hopelessly caught in the grip of ennui, struggling (and mostly failing) to make sense out of life and the world in general. We've seen this story so many times that it's starting to wear thin. In many ways, KICKING AND SCREAMING is mildly enjoyable, but all it really does is go over old ground with new characters.
Much of KICKING AND SCREAMING's appeal results from its cast. Josh Hamilton (WITH HONORS) is the weakest of the performers, giving a somewhat bland portrayal as Grover, a 22-year old would-be author with writer's block. Much better is Olivia D'Abo (THE LAST GOOD TIME, GREEDY) as Jane, his girlfriend, who decides to move to Prague after graduating. Chris Eigeman essays Max, a character with the same sort of acerbic wit as the ultra-patriotic American he brought to life in BARCELONA. Jason Wiles, Carlos Jacott, and Parker Posey are effective as Grover and Max's friends. And what would any Gen X picture be without the presence of the ubiquitous Eric Stoltz?
The basic premise of KICKING AND SCREAMING is to follow a small group of college graduates as they are reluctantly forced to face "reality"--moving away from campus, forming new relationships, and getting jobs. As it turns out, none of the characters are able to make a clean break. Grover and Max still hang out around their alma mater, Jane runs away to another country, Otis (Jacott) goes to grad school, Skippy (Wiles) audits a few classes, and Chet (Stoltz), the career student, returns semester after semester.
The characters are all pretty likable, and it's not too hard to sympathize with their situation--at least until their social paralysis becomes irritating. But KICKING AND SCREAMING is essentially a film of moments. Much of the dialogue is crisp, and there are several individual scenes that work to near-perfection (most notably the flashbacks that detail the building of Grover and Jane's relationship), but the connecting material is weak. Above all, the movie comes to a conclusion without a sense of closure.
KICKING AND SCREAMING is often witty, occasionally hilarious, and ultimately bittersweet. But, in the final analysis, there's not much here that's original or insightful. This is essentially the story of a group of post-college slackers wrestling with life's many, varied tribulations--not exactly virgin ground for '90s film makers. And, in this case, what's on screen is just a little too familiar to be worth lauding.
