Cast: Saskia Reeves, Robert Reynolds, Sami Frey, Jacqueline McKenzie, Kiet Lam Director: Pauline Chan Producer: Jim McElroy Screenplay: Robert Carter and Pauline Chan based on characters from DREAMHOUSE by Kate Grenville Cinematography: Kevin Hayward Music: Douglas Stephen Rae U.S. Distributor: Filmopolis Pictures
In TRAPS, a four-character drama is played out against the turbulent backdrop of 1950 French Indochina. An Australian man and his British wife arrive in what will soon be Vietnam to compile a report on the successes of French plantations there. Little do they realize that external pressures are about to rip apart their seemingly-perfect marriage, and each will have to face the true identity that society's conventions have buried deep within them. This fascinating study of how global events impact on the individual is marred only by occasionally obvious plotting and subpar performances.
TRAPS opens with Louise and Michael Duffield (Saskia Reeves and Robert Reynolds) traveling to the plantation of Daniel Renouard (Sami Frey). Michael has come here to research and author a study of the overseas successes of the French Indochine Rubber Company. His wife, a photojournalist, is along to snap pictures to compliment his writing. However, these are not tranquil times in southeast Asia. The Viet Minh are gathering strength and support to overthrow French rule, and it's not long before everyone becomes involved in the struggle, with Louise, Michael, Daniel, and Daniel's daughter, Viola (Jacqueline McKenzie), fighting for their lives.
Each of the characters has a clearly-defined arc. Michael, initially a self-confident, take-charge man, learns that what he really craves is safety and stability, and he'll do anything, including compromising his journalistic integrity, to attain those ends. Louise, a prim and proper Englishwoman, discovers that she needs a life of substance, not the hollow sham that her marriage to Michael has become. She finds a core of strength deep inside that she never suspected was there.
As the film progresses, Daniel becomes further entrenched in his position that Indochina is his country, and no one is going to push him out. No matter how apparent the inevitable result becomes, he will not see it. Like one of Shakespeare's tragically flawed characters, he stands his ground to the end. Viola, initially in thrall to her father, eventually finds the strength to defy him. However, hers is the least developed part, since the character is used primarily as a catalyst for Louise's transformation.
Both the political and the personal aspects of TRAPS are compelling, although there are times when the plot follows a too- predictable path. Unfortunately, the acting lets the screenplay down. The best of the four leads is Saskia Reeves, and she's no better than mediocre. Sami Frey, who gave an impressively intense performance in MY LIFE AND TIMES WITH ANTONIN ARTAUD, doesn't do much to breathe life into his character. Robert Reynolds is flat, and Jacqueline McKenzie has the opposite problem, often going over-the-top. There are numerous scenes where these actors can't convey the full impact of a situation, so it's left to the viewer to interpolate.
In many ways, TRAPS is similar to this year's BEYOND RANGOON, about a sheltered outsider who encounters political turmoil in a distant country and consequently undergoes a life-changing experience. Considering the universal appeal of these themes, it's not surprising that they have shown up again. First time director Pauline Chan (who was born in Vietnam) has crafted a film with great personal importance. More significantly, however, there's resonance in TRAPS for any viewer--that who we think we are, or pretend to be, often bears little resemblance to our true personality.
