"Real terror in real time": that's what NICK OF TIME promises. Unfortunately, that's not what it delivers. Sure, the film unfolds with one minute of screen time equaling one minute of theater time, but there's no hint of tension. About the only thing John Badham's lamely- directed thriller has in common with an Alfred Hitchcock production is the blatant rip-off of a camera shot from VERTIGO. And such an obvious reminder of the master serves to underline how poor this effort is.
As a lead in a romantic comedy or a drama, Johnny Depp has shown considerable screen presence. Based on this performance, however, he's not cut out for thrillers. His Gene Watson is so incredibly bland that it's difficult to stay with him through ninety minutes. We need bad guys Christopher Walken and Roma Maffia to liven things up.
The premise, which is a case of wasted potential, has Watson and his young daughter, Lynn (Courtney Chase), disembarking from an Amtrack train in Los Angeles. As they're making their way through the station, Lynn is kidnapped and Gene is told that the only way he'll see her alive again is if he takes a gun and assassinates the liberal governor of California (Marsha Mason). Just to make sure he doesn't get cold feet or try to run to the nearest police officer, one of the bad guys (Walken) will be close at all times.
NICK OF TIME relies on a bunch of easily-predicted "twists" to keep it moving. The real reason that Walken's character wants the governor dead turns out to be incredibly feeble. Then there's the question of why the assassination plan has to be so convoluted, especially when almost everyone on the governor's staff appears to be involved. This motion picture rarely makes sense, even when you're not thinking too deeply about what's going on.
One has to question why Paramount chose to release this film as their big Thanksgiving offering. Originally, their intention was to open Tom Cruise's MISSION IMPOSSIBLE for the holiday, but those plans were scrapped early in the year. NICK OF TIME is a poor replacement, but there's a certain justice in showing this movie around the time of year best known for turkeys.
