Featuring the voices of Kevin Bacon, Bridget Fonda, Bob Hoskins, Phil Collins, and Jim Cummings Director: Simon Wells Producer: Steve Hickner Screenplay: Cliff Ruby, Elana Lesser, David Steven Cohen, and Roger S.H. Schulman Music: James Horner U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
Aside from the obvious discrepancy in animation quality, there's one very big difference between BALTO and films like BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, ALADDIN, and THE LION KING. While the men and women at Disney pen their scripts with audiences of all ages in mind, the four screenwriters for BALTO have aimed their film strictly at the under- twelve crowd. This movie isn't likely to sicken adults, but it definitely isn't meant for them, and that's one of the reasons why BALTO's take at the box office is going to be dramatically less than what a corresponding Disney release could rake in.
The animation is serviceable, although not eye-popping. There are some scenes, mostly during snowstorms, that look impressive, but these are offset by a number of pedestrian, Saturday morning cartoon-like sequences. BALTO certainly isn't a visual treat. There aren't any show-stopping tunes, either. With the exception of the closing song ("Reach for the Light", performed by Steve Winwood), there's not a musical number to be found, which, more than anything else, accounts for the short running time. For good or ill, songs tend to pad out animated motion pictures.
BALTO opens and closes with short live-action sequences featuring Myriam Margoles and Lola Bates-Campbell. 95% of the film, however, is animated -- a colorful, if unspectacular, rendition of the tale told by Margoles to the young Bates-Campbell. (BALTO is very loosely based on a true story.) The action takes place in 1925 Nome, Alaska, where a diphtheria epidemic has struck. With bad weather encroaching, the only way to retrieve life-saving medication from Anchorage is by dog sled. BALTO tells of how a half-wolf/half-dog struggles through blizzards and treacherous terrain to save the life of one little girl, while finding puppy love along the way.
The vocal talents employed for BALTO are adequate, although not standouts. Kevin Bacon has the title role. Bridget Fonda is Jenna, Balto's dog girlfriend. Jim Cummings, who was last heard in THE LION KING as one of the hyenas, gives voice to Balto's rival, a sort of canine Gaston. Then there are the requisite comic sidekicks: Bob Hoskins as Boris the goose and Phil Collins as a pair of jolly polar bears, Muk and Luk.
BALTO isn't a great animated feature, but, Disney's computer- generated TOY STORY aside, it's the only one of its kind this holiday season. Well-paced, politically correct, and undemanding, the movie is good for children. Its appeal for parents is another matter altogether, however -- but at least most of them won't hate it. Or so Universal Pictures and Amblin Entertainment hope.
