During the decade of the 1990s, Zhang Yimou, one of the most internationally acclaimed of all the so-called "Fifth Generation" Chinese film makers, has made a series of visually striking, narratively compelling pictures, including RAISE THE RED LANTERN and TO LIVE. SHANGHAI TRIAD, Zhang's latest offering, delves deeply into the workings of Shanghai's gangland during the 1930s. Reminiscent of Prohibition-era Chicago -- and therefore depicting the universality of organized crime - - SHANGHAI TRIAD is a fascinating, though imperfect, look at the lure and power of greed to corrupt and destroy.
The story is told from the point-of-view of 14-year old Shuisheng (Wang Xiaoxiao), a country "innocent" brought by his uncle (Li Xuejian) to Shanghai to work for Boss Tang (Li Baotian). Zhang uses Shuisheng to represent the audience; everything that takes place is seen through the young boy's eyes. In fact, there are several effective first person camera shots where we see events unfold as if from Shuisheng's perspective. Like those of us watching the film, Shuisheng has no knowledge about what it means to live in Tang's circle, and his education is ours.
Shuisheng's first job for the Boss is to serve his mistress, the petulant, controlling Bijou (Gong Li). Like Shuisheng, Bijou was born and bred in the country, but, unlike her new servant, she has allowed the bright lights, easy money, and fast life of Shanghai to corrupt her innocence. A singer in the Boss' nightclub and lover to both him and one of his top men, she is trapped in a situation that is out of control. There are times when she recognizes the futility of her existence and lashes out in mingled pain and despair.
SHANGHAI TRIAD takes place over an eight-day period that chronicles Shuisheng's arrival to work for the Boss, his conflicted emotions for Bijou, a bloody attempt to kill Tang, and the subsequent flight to an island safe house. There is plenty of action, but, like Zhang's previous films, the primary focus is on relationships and internal conflicts. The interaction between Shuisheng, Bijou, and Tang forms the central dynamic, and those three characters represent this movie's true "Shanghai triad."
Unfortunately, due in part to the script and in part to a flat performance by young actor Wang Xiaoxiao, Shuisheng comes across as bland. Even though he's in nearly every scene, we're rarely sure what he's thinking or how he feels about those who control his life. There are hints of sexual curiosity, growing faithfulness, and building horror, but Wang does a poor job conveying these elements. His eyes and too-often blank expression create an unfortunate dramatic vacuum.
Conversely, the always-luminescent Gong Li is at the height of her ability in SHANGHAI TRIAD, almost making up for what's lacking in her young co-star. Her Bijou is a marvel of subtlety and complexity. Not only is Gong an amazing actress, but she has an undeniable screen presence as well. Bijou may be her most sultry role to date, as she sashays her way across the screen, purring the words to the song "Pretending", her character's anthem. While the relationship between Bijou and Shuisheng is left disappointingly underdeveloped, the actress' performance makes it easier to overlook this defect.
With its underworld violence and straightforward narrative, SHANGHAI TRIAD may be Zhang's most accessible film to date. It is not, however, his best work, having neither the epic scope of TO LIVE nor the quiet emotional power of RAISE THE RED LANTERN. Yet there is still much to like about SHANGHAI TRIAD, not the least of which is the production's gorgeous look (credit the director and his cinematographer, Li Xiao). SHANGHAI TRIAD overflows with memorable imagery and atmosphere. And, as this film verifies, a weak entry by Zhang is often far more engrossing than a strong entry by many other directors.
