Cast: Al Pacino, John Cusack, Bridget Fonda, Danny Aiello, David Paymer, Martin Landau, Tony Franciosa Director: Harold Becker Producers: Harold Becker, Ken Lipper, Charles Mulvehill, and Edward R. Pressman Screenplay: Ken Lipper, Nicholas Pileggi, Paul Schrader, and Bo Goldman Cinematography: Michael Seresin Music: Jerry Goldsmith U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
There's nothing quite like watching screen veteran Al Pacino overact, something he accomplishes with unparalleled style and verve. Such grandstanding won him an Academy Award for SCENT OF A WOMAN after decades of finely-tuned performances failed to get him past the nomination stage. In CITY HALL, there are a few of these over-the-top moments, including one wonderful, pulpit-pounding tirade where you're just waiting for the "hoo-ha!" that never comes. Yet, in the context of this unspectacular tale of political wheeling, dealing, and corruption, Pacino's "spotlight scenes" become the film's only memorable moments. He's no closer to top form here than in either HEAT or TWO BITS, but he still draws the camera like a magnet.
CITY HALL is an example of what happens when there are too many writers. As with last year's OUTBREAK (in which the numerous script doctors were uncredited), subplots start vying with each other for screen time and the bridge connecting them becomes dangerously unstable. Here, the least interesting -- a thriller with John Cusack set up as the hero -- comes out on top. Shunted aside is a potentially more interesting examination of the political machinations that go into the day-to-day business of running a city.
The city in question is New York, and the mayor is John Pappas (Pacino), the best man to preside over the five boroughs since Laguardia. His hand-picked deputy, Kevin Calhoun (John Cusack), handles all of Pappas' leg-work: gathering background information, doing damage control, and putting in appearances at certain social events. When a cop and a six year-old boy are killed in a North Brooklyn street shooting, and the mayor refuses to distance himself from the potential fallout, Calhoun swings into action. His investigation uncovers high- level corruption involving one of the city's most respected judges (Martin Landau), a political boss in South Brooklyn (Danny Aiello), and a reputed mob chief (Tony Franciosa).
Of course, putting aside the question of what the deputy mayor is doing playing a "gumshoe", the various elements of CITY HALL's thriller/mystery aspect come together a little too neatly to be readily acceptable. We also never get much sense of danger or tension. Kevin is like someone putting together a jigsaw puzzle -- all the pieces are on the table, so we know he'll eventually fit them in place. Along the way, he gets some help from Marybeth Cogan (an underused Bridget Fonda), a lawyer representing the slain policeman's widow.
There are times when CITY HALL sparkles, but rarely do these instances relate to Calhoun's investigation. The mayor's struggle to erect a bank exchange, along with all the attendant favors called in and trade-offs made, lends a realistic flavor to the proceedings. When CITY HALL works, this is the sort of thing that propels it. The main story isn't overwhelming, but at least the background is rich and varied.
Despite the presence of three top-line actors and a fine supporting cast, CITY HALL never lives up to its promise. There's too little grit and too much predictability, and even the central character, Calhoun, is never better than half-developed. Director Harold Becker (SEA OF LOVE, MALICE) keeps CITY HALL well-paced, so boredom never threatens. Even so, as political thrillers go, this one stands below the likes of even Kevin Costner's NO WAY OUT, and isn't close to the same category as ALL THE PRESIDENT'S MEN. There's not enough substance or energy here to warrant more than a lukewarm recommendation.
