Cast: Tim Curry, Kevin Bishop, Kermit the Frog, The Great Gonzo, Rizzo Rat, Fozzie Bear, Miss Piggy, Billy Connolly, Jennifer Saunders Muppet Performers: Steve Whitmire, Dave Goelz, Jerry Nelson, Kevin Clash, Frank Oz Director: Brian Henson Producers: Brian Henson and Martin G. Baker Screenplay: Kirk R. Thatcher, Jerry Juhl, and James V. Hart based on the novel by Robert Louis Stevenson Cinematography: John Fenner Music: Hans Zimmer Songs by Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
No matter how you feel about cute, fuzzy puppets, it's difficult to actively dislike the Muppets. From their 1976 television show until today, Jim Henson's creations have always appealed on more than one level, offering adorable playmates and positive messages to children and surprisingly sophisticated humor to adults. MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND, the fifth big screen feature to star Kermit the Frog and friends, and the second directed by Brian Henson, delivers exactly what fans -- young and old -- expect.
As was true of their 1992 outing, THE MUPPET CHRISTMAS CAROL, the Muppets are visiting familiar motion picture territory -- there have been over a half-dozen movie adaptations of Robert Louis Stevenson's TREASURE ISLAND. Of course, none before now have featured singing crocodiles, warbling lobsters, talking frogs, and high-kicking pigs. As usual, a few human actors get in on the fun, including Tim Curry and Kevin Bishop.
MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND doesn't exactly re-invent the classic story, but it takes a few liberties with it. Young Jim Hawkins (Bishop) is on board the ship of Captain Smollett (Kermit the Frog), bound for the Caribbean and buried pirates' treasure. The crew, a mutinous group of thugs and cutthroats, are led by the one-legged bandit Long John Silver (Tim Curry). Once land is sighted, Silver makes his power-play, nabbing Jim and his treasure map and seizing control of the ship. The only obstacle still remaining between the rogue and unlimited wealth is an army of wild boars and their leader, Benjamina Gunn (Miss Piggy).
There have been many great on-screen/off-screen couples -- Bogart and Becall, Tracy and Hepburn, Branagh and Thompson -- but none are quite as intriguing as Kermit and Piggy. A match made in Jim Henson's workshop, these two have gone through some tough times in the last twenty years, but they have endured. And, although they don't have many scenes together in MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND (Piggy doesn't show up until the film is two-thirds over), it's clear that the chemistry is still there.
One of the chief pleasures of MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND is watching Tim Curry essay Long John Silver. Curry, who no one would ever call subtle, creates one of the most memorable human characters in any Muppet film. Kevin Bishop makes an appealing Jim Hawkins, the young protagonist in search of a family. Jennifer Saunders and Billy Connolly have suitably overt-the-top cameos.
As has always been true in Muppet movies, set design is superb. MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND is an impressive-looking motion picture, rich in color and contrast, and featuring some impeccable matte paintings. There are the usual musical numbers -- seven jaunty tunes that will be forgotten the moment you leave the theater. They may not be memorable, but at least they're not irritating.
MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND comes out under the Disney umbrella, and, like every movie that is favored with Mickey's Midas touch, this one has the potential to be a huge favorite. The Muppets certainly have "family appeal", and the film is designed to keep parents interested and children enthralled. It's not as eye-popping as TOY STORY or as magical as an animated feature, but MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND represents ninety- plus minutes of solid entertainment, and you won't have to dig to find it.
