Cast: Kelsey Grammer, Lauren Holly, Rob Schneider, Bruce Dern, Rip Torn, William H. Macy, Harry Dean Stanton, Toby Huss, Harland Williams Director: David S. Ward Producer: Robert Lawrence Screenplay: Hugh Wilson, Andrew Kurtzman, and Eliot Wald Cinematography: Victor Hammer Music: Randy Edelman U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
DOWN PERISCOPE is the big screen's answer to MCHALE'S NAVY. With Kelsey Grammer in command of the USS Stingray, you can be sure that this isn't a drama. Unfortunately, it's not much of a comedy, either. There are occasional laughs, but, as with most movies that think they're funnier than they actually are, most of the jokes fall flat. What we're left with is the tired, overused storyline of a bunch of mismatched underdogs coming together as a team in time to overcome their adversaries.
The best thing about DOWN PERISCOPE (in fact, just about the only good thing) is Kelsey Grammer's relaxed performance. Although best known for his role as TV's FRASIER, Grammer exhibits a big screen presence. He doesn't appear to be a great actor, but, unlike so many stars making the TV-to-movie switch, his likability doesn't get lost in the transition.
Grammer plays career Navy man Thomas Dodge, the proverbial loose cannon. After serving his country for more than twenty years, Dodge is finally awarded his first submarine command -- the old diesel rust bucket USS Stingray. His crew is comprised of the usual misfits, including a female officer (Lauren Holly, whose film career has taken off), a hyperactive second-in-command (Rob Schneider, looking a lot like Emilio Estevez), an electrician with an affinity for getting shocked (Toby Huss), and a sonar operator who does a credible whale imitation (Harland Williams). Many of these characters have personal and professional problems that are resolved during their stay on the Stingray.
Dodge is supposed to lead his boat on a mock assault of two East Coast targets. It's the Stingray against the U.S. Navy. One admiral (Rip Torn) thinks that a diesel sub can still pose a threat to the United States, while another (Bruce Dern) is convinced that today's nuclear vessels represent an impenetrable barrier. The war games are designed to decide the issue. At stake for Dodge is his future in the Navy -- if he succeeds, he gets a permanent command; if he fails, he gets a desk job.
Undoubtedly, the most entertaining part of DOWN PERISCOPE comes during the end credits, when various cast members "let down their hair" to join the Village People in a lively, campy rock video for their '70s hit, "In the Navy." There's a lot more energy in this four-minute segment than in the hour-and-a-half that precedes it.
There are quite a few submarine movies available -- certainly enough to provide material for a decent satire. Unfortunately, DOWN PERISCOPE is more interested in regurgitating formulas that we've seen literally dozens of times before. (THE BAD NEWS BEARS under water?) Other than briefly lampooning the XO's mutiny from CRIMSON TIDE, this picture fires duds, relying on cheap sex jokes and slapstick gags to garner laughs. Down and out with DOWN PERISCOPE.
