Cast: Michelle Pfeiffer, Robert Redford, Joe Mantegna, Stockard Channing, Kate Nelligan, Glenn Plummer, James Rebhorn Director: Jon Avnet Producers: Jon Avnet, David Nicksay, and Jordan Kerner Screenplay: Joan Didion & John Gregory Dunne, suggested by the book GOLDEN GIRL by Alanna Nash Cinematography: Karl Walter Lindenlaub Music: Thomas Newman U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL, the new film from director Jon Avnet (FRIED GREEN TOMATOES), is a splashy, beautifully-framed, nicely-photographed soap opera. Taking its inspiration from the life of news anchor Jessica Savitch (as told in Alanna Nash's biography, GOLDEN GIRL), UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL presents a sanitized version of a gripping, tragic tale. The true facts of Savitch's life are far more interesting than what's presented in this film, but Avnet wanted something more upbeat than the story of a woman who pursued success like a bloodhound, then self- destructed when she achieved it.
Like all good soap operas, UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL puts romance first. As a love story, this film is affecting; as a look inside TV news, it's diverting (although not in the same league as BROADCAST NEWS); but as a drama, it's weak. Avnet is interested in manipulating the audience, not presenting any really arresting or thought-provoking material. The director enjoys orchestrating tearful moments. He did it in FRIED GREEN TOMATOES; he does it here again, and there's not much subtlety in his methods.
UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL starts out in Miami, where Tally Atwater (Michelle Pfeiffer) has just been hired as an assistant to news producer Warren Justice (Robert Redford). After several months of desk work, she's given a one-shot on-air chance as WMIA's weatherperson. While giving five-day forecasts clearly isn't her forte, Warren is impressed by the way "she eats the lens", and promotes her to reporter. Soon, she's on camera every night, even moving up to co-anchor. Meanwhile, Tally and Warren become romantically involved. But, when Tally's agent, Bucky Tarranova (Joe Mantegna), gets her a job in the nation's #4 market, Philadelphia, Warren elects to remain behind in Miami. In his words, he's been where Tally is going, and he has no desire to return.
The core story of UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL -- Tally's maturation as a newswoman -- is rendered blandly and without color. Frankly, if the romance wasn't appealing, this movie would be dreadfully uninteresting. Avnet attempts to add some tension by placing Tally in the middle of a prison uprising, but most compelling aspect of these scenes isn't how she responds to the situation, but how Warren reacts -- juggling news feeds and phone calls from the network while worrying that Tally might be killed.
Even though he's showing his years, Robert Redford is still charming and charismatic as a romantic lead. He and Michelle Pfeiffer develop an agreeable rapport that enables us to accept their relationship in spite of the age difference. Their scenes together don't smolder, but they are warm and pleasant, and we find ourselves rooting for these two to find some way to be happy together. Alas, in this land of predictable melodrama where A STAR IS BORN meets BROADCAST NEWS, there's always some plot contrivance designed to keep them apart.
There are some worthwhile elements floating around in Avnet's soapy water. Some of the behind-the-scenes newsroom bickering is entertaining, and Karl Walter Lindenlaub's camera manages to capture a few memorable shots, including one of Pfeiffer and Redford enjoying a quiet moment with the darkened Philadelphia skyline as the backdrop. Mostly, though, UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL is about Warren and Tally's relationship, and, if there's a reason that this film doesn't gel completely, it's because neither character is absorbing on their own. While mining for gold, UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL unearths bronze -- still a shiny metal, but not nearly as rare.
