Cast: Sarah Jessica Parker, Eric Schaeffer, Ben Stiller, Elle Macpherson Director: Eric Schaeffer Producers: Brad Krevoy, Steve Stabler, and Brad Jenkel Screenplay: Eric Schaeffer based on a story by Eric Schaeffer & Tony Spiridakis Cinematography: Ron Fortunato Music: Charlton Pettus and Amanda Kravat U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
The sophomore jinx strikes again! In the last twelve months, this mysterious cinematic malady has afflicted a number of up-and-coming film makers, including Robert Rodriguez (DESPERADO), Kevin Smith (MALLRATS), and now Eric Schaeffer. Schaeffer is one-half of the duo responsible for 1994's quirky, often-hilarious MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND. Little of the zest and originality of that film is evident in IF LUCY FELL, which makes one wonder how much of TURNAROUND's inspiration came from Schaeffer, and how much came from his former partner, Donal Lardner Ward.
Lucy (Sarah Jessica Parker) and Joe (Schaeffer) share a New York apartment. Best friends since college, these two have developed a more intimate (albeit platonic) relationship than most lovers. They also have a "death pact": if they aren't involved in serious romances by the time Lucy turns 30, they will join hands and jump off the Brooklyn Bridge together. Lucy's birthday is one month away, and both of them are alone, so they have some serious dating ahead of them.
The object of Joe's obsession is Jane (Elle Macpherson), his beautiful next-door neighbor. Joe has been watching her through his apartment window for years, but he's never been able to work up the courage to talk to her. Now, through a series of carefully-orchestrated moves, he has placed himself in a situation where a conversation can't be avoided. Meanwhile, Lucy has become intrigued by an offbeat painter named Bwick (Ben Stiller), who can best be described as a sweet-but- eccentric idiot.
IF LUCY FELL tries desperately to recapture the feel of WHEN HARRY MET SALLY, but, even during its better moments, it falls short. Harry and Sally seemed like real people -- they connected with each other and the audience. The same certainly can't be said about Lucy and Joe. These two are cardboard cut-outs, and the only thing we feel for them is apathy.
For the most part, IF LUCY FELL is a disappointingly superficial romantic comedy. There's no chemistry between any of the characters. The acting is mediocre, with Schaeffer and Parker exhibiting no screen presence. The best performance (gasp!) is given by supermodel-turned- actress Elle Macpherson, which says something about the work of her co- stars.
On those rare occasions when it has a chance to examine a potentially-interesting issue (such as the relationship between voyeurism, exhibitionism, and fantasy), IF LUCY FELL lets the opportunity pass. The result is that this film, which wants to be smart, funny, and hip, succeeds instead in being mostly irritating. And the far-too-predictable ending is both contrived and manipulative.
After MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND, one could reasonably expect something more than this -- a Generation X picture that takes angst to absurd levels -- from Eric Schaeffer. Unfortunately, what we are saddled with is a whiney, talky, stagnant movie that's more pretentious than romantic, and more dull than funny. IF LUCY FELL trips early on, and keeps stumbling for most of its ninety-two minute running length.
