Cast: Robert Duvall, Aidan Quinn, Frances Fisher, Brian Dennehy, Lexi Randall, Kaytlyn Knowles Director: James Keach Producers: Clint Eastwood and David Valdes Screenplay: Philip Railsback Cinematography: Bruce Surtees Music: David Benoit U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
THE STARS FELL ON HENRIETTA is another example of the time-honored story of the loser making good. However, although the plot follows a clear formula, this production has been crafted with such care and intelligence that it transcends the predictable plot. THE STARS FELL ON HENRIETTA isn't among the year's best films, but it's the kind of small, satisfying motion picture that offers two hours of enjoyment whether watched in a theater or on video (where it's more likely to surface, given its limited distribution).
Acting is one of the keys to HENRIETTA's success. Robert Duvall, who can give a heartfelt performance with the best, is delightful as Mr. Cox, an oil wildcatter and perennial loser roaming through Texas in the early 1930s. Equally impressive is Aidan Quinn, one of the most underrated actors of his generation. Quinn generally doesn't take flashy parts; hence, he often doesn't receive his deserved share of attention. Here, as Don Day, a down-on-his-luck farmer with a family to provide for, Quinn again takes a low key part. The supporting cast includes Frances Fisher as Don's wife, Lexi Randall as his eldest daughter, Beatrice, and the always-delightful Brian Dennehy as Big Dave, the "richest man in Texas."
THE STARS FELL ON HENRIETTA opens with Mr. Cox, accompanied by his constant companion, Mathilda the cat, driving into town in a vintage 1930s automobile. Actually, since the car breaks down before he gets there, he ends up hitching a ride. Cox, as always, is looking for oil. He doesn't have a penny to his name, and he's never had a successful strike before, but that doesn't quell his enthusiasm, and when he thinks he locates a huge, untapped reservoir of liquid black gold in a place called Henrietta, he starts looking for investors. Cox agrees to go fifty/fifty with Don Day, the owner of the property where the prospective well is to be drilled, but since Don isn't rich, Cox has to raise $5000 on his own. The only problem is, every man of means knows his fruitless track record, and isn't interested in contributing to his latest scheme. Yet, even as Cox plots to obtain the money, Don scrapes together everything he has and sinks it into the venture, with tragic consequences for himself and his family.
Don and Cox are both dreamers, and this quality binds them together in the end. Because they're such likable, well-developed characters, we root unashamedly for them. THE STARS FELL ON HENRIETTA doesn't race towards the inevitable; it ambles. And it's the easy, unhurried gait that makes this film worthwhile, since it gives us an opportunity to get to know the two protagonists. This film isn't about men getting rich from an oil strike; it's about visionaries who, in Cox's words, hitch their wagons to a star. Cox loves life and the freedom of the road. Whether he makes or loses money is largely irrelevant.
This film oozes atmosphere. Director James Keach and cinematographer Bruce Surtees have worked meticulously to recapture the essence of an America that, although only sixty years in the past, is no more. As presented in HENRIETTA, the life of a farmer may have been simple, but it was also risky. If the crops didn't grow, the bank could repossess the land, and a whole family would be without a home. Although this film contains certain nostalgic elements, it's doesn't bask in an unfailingly warm glow. Racism, poverty, and their attendant hardships are very much in evidence.
THE STARS FELL ON HENRIETTA functions best as a character piece, since the basic storyline is straightforward. There are some problems with the conclusion, which ties up loose ends a little too neatly and conveniently. Nevertheless, with excellent performances from Duvall and Quinn, and sure directing by Keach, this film offers a pleasantly engrossing and satisfying drama with underdog protagonists whose efforts everyone can applaud.
