United States, 1995 Shown at the 1996 SXSW Film Festival Running Length: 1:10 MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, profanity, grunge) Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2:1
Cast: Selene Vigil, Janis Tanaka, Jasper Streak, Bobo, Criss Crass Director: Maria Garguilo Producers: Maria Garguilo, Sheila Kelly, and Tami Hinch Screenplay: Maria Garguilo Cinematography: Lulu Garguilo
THE YEAR OF MY JAPANESE COUSIN is written badly, acted poorly, and filmed with an amateurish lack of style. This is what might result from a group of people deciding to put together a movie without a clear idea of what they're attempting. THE YEAR OF MY JAPANESE COUSIN is essentially a rock music video that's extended to seventy minutes by including elements of a trite and melodramatic narrative.
The story, such as it is, introduces us to Stevie (Selene Vigil), the lead singer of the band Scuba Boy. Stevie's life is turned upside down when her Japanese cousin, Yukari (Janis Tanaka), arrives in the States for a visit. Stevie starts out as Yukari's mentor and guide, but, as the young Japanese woman gains familiarity with America and displays a remarkable aptitude with a guitar, she becomes a popular performer. Soon, she has usurped Stevie's place as Scuba Boy's leader, and the jealousy between the cousins threatens to destroy not only their relationship, but the band itself.
THE YEAR OF MY JAPANESE COUSIN fails to take advantage of an opportunity to examine cultural differences between Japan and the United States. The characters, like the script, are too shallow for any such meaningful exploration. In fact, aside from a couple of throw-in lines, these issues are largely ignored. Writer/director Maria Garguilo is obviously infatuated by Seattle's alternative rock scene, and all she shows a real interest in is capturing a segment of it on film. She would have done better to try her hand at a documentary.
Neither Vigil nor Tanaka shows a glimmer of acting ability. They have a lot of energy and drive, which comes across in the concert scenes, but it's dreadful to watch them attempt drama. None of the supporting performers are any better.
The movie's sole attraction is the rock soundtrack. I suppose it's possible to derive limited enjoyment from THE YEAR OF MY JAPANESE COUSIN if you close your eyes, but, even then, you'll be subjected to a barrage of inept dialogue. It's unlikely that this film will obtain significant exposure, which is fortunate, since its obscurity will spare most unaware viewers the indignity of sitting through it.
