Cast: Michael J. Nelson, Trace Beaulieu, Kevin Murphy, Jim Mallon Director: Jim Mallon Producer: Jim Mallon Screenplay: Michael J. Nelson, Trace Beaulieu, Jim Mallon, Kevin Murphy, Mary Jo Pehl, Paul Chaplin, Bridget Jones Cinematography: Jeff Stonehouse U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
I guess there are some concepts that don't excel in the translation from the small screen to the big one, and MYSTERY SCIENCE THEATER 3000 appears to be among these. The TV series, which started on a Minneapolis UHF channel in 1988 before moving to HBO's Comedy Channel in 1989, provides light, undemanding entertainment for those who enjoy lampooning (or, perhaps more appropriately, harpooning) bad movies. This new motion picture incarnation, which boasts larger sets but essentially the same format, is on par with one of the lesser episodes. As a TV diversion, MST3K is thoroughly enjoyable, but, in this new medium, it's something of a disappointment.
For those unfamiliar with the MST3K premise, it goes something like this: a dastardly mad scientist, Dr. Forrester (Trace Beaulieu), has decided to conquer the world by subjecting the entire population to bad movies. On an Earth-orbiting space station called the Satellite of Love, Forrester tries out his plan on a hapless human guinea pig, Mike Nelson, and two robots, Tom Servo (voice of Kevin Murphy) and Crow T. Robot (voice of Trace Beaulieu). Instead of being tortured into submission, however, these three actually seem to enjoy the experience. Episode-after-episode, they sit in the audience and mock whatever "cinematic suppository" Forrester exhibits. As viewers, we see a movie screen showing the picture of choice with a row of seats and three moving heads silhouetted against it.
For MST3K: THE MOVIE, the film-to-be-savaged is THIS ISLAND EARTH, a 1954 science fiction embarrassment that could hold its own against any other entries in the worst movie of all time competition. Featuring the obscure cast of Jeff Morrow, Rex Reason, and Faith Domergue, the chaotic, idiotic plot involves a trip by two Earth scientists to the planet Metulana (which, in the words of one of the MST3K trio, looks like "THE JETSONS after Armageddon"). Once there, the Earth man and woman learn of an intended invasion of their homeworld, avoid becoming the victims of a giant mutant insectoid, and join a helpful Metulana native in escaping from the dying, bombed-out world.
A significant problem with using a movie this deliciously bad is that the film generates enough unintentional humor on its own, so it doesn't really need the quips and barbs from Servo, Mike, and Crow. Although a number of their comments are very funny, THIS ISLAND EARTH would have had me doubled over with laughter had I seen it without the MST3K format. Unfortunately, during the course of this film, there are several contrived breaks that get the characters out of the darkened theater. During these sequences, without a cheesy flick to inspire them, their banter comes across as juvenile. Such unnecessary and pointless padding dilutes the movie's better aspects.
Die-hard fans will undoubtedly be delighted, but it's more difficult to determine how casual viewers will react, especially if they realize that they're paying for something that's no better than what's available on TV. In fact, the theatrical environment may stifle MST3K, unless you happen to see it in a ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW setting. By its nature, MST3K demands audience participation -- something difficult to obtain in a typical movie-watching environment.
In general, it's easy to praise the ingenuity of the MST3K writers, although less for this script than for some of what they have previously accomplished. Motion pictures, no matter what they celebrate or deride, should be something of an event (after all, you have to travel to get to the theater, then dole out money once you arrive). In this case, however, MST3K: THE MOVIE is routine -- sporadically funny, occasionally clever, but routine nonetheless.
