Cast: Tom Berenger, Diane Venora, Ernie Hudson, Glenn Plummer, Marc Anthony, William Forsythe, Luis Guzman Director: Robert Mandel Producers: Morrie Eisenmann and Jim Steele Screenplay: Roy Frumkes, Rocco Simonelli, and Alan Ormsby Cinematography: Bruce Surtees Music: Gary Chang U.S. Distributor: Orion Pictures
At Miami's Columbus High, classes aren't the only things students cut. Since it's difficult to get guns through the metal detectors, knives seem to be the weapon of choice. Not that a minor inconvenience like a metal detector will stop any really determined delinquent. Plenty of firearms are shot off -- all in "self defense", of course. In fact, by the time this brainless action flick has ricocheted to a conclusion, someone has procured a rocket launcher for use in the halls.
Tom Berenger plays soldier of fortune Shale, an ex-covert operative for the U.S. government. After the failure of his last mission, a raid into Cuba, Shale and his compatriots have been retired. Now unemployed, Shale ventures into the teaching profession when his girlfriend, Jane (Diane Venora), is beaten up by a sumo wrestler-type hired by one of her disgruntled students. Shale has decided to use his multiple talents to clean up Columbus High. When his buddies from the service learn that drugs, and therefore money, are involved, they're eager to help out. Soon, this group of mercenaries has infiltrated the high school, and, with the introduction of drug kingpins, members of a gang called the "Kings of Destruction", and a corrupt principal, the stage is set for a violent confrontation.
This is really a Steven Seagal movie with Tom Berenger doing his best Seagal impression (although, even at his worst, Berenger has about 300% more range than the wooden-faced action star). Director Robert Mandel (F/X) brings a sense of wry, warped humor to THE SUBSTITUTE -- he rarely takes anything too seriously -- but it's not enough to save the film. Admittedly, parts are fun in a mindless, visceral sort of way, but the whole is a lot worse than the sum of its parts.
Setting a vigilante thriller in a high school, even the High School from Hell, might seem like a bad idea. After all, since the point of such a movie is for Berenger to kick butt and kill people, his options would appear to be limited by the presence of so many juveniles. Never fear, though. The clever screen writers have found a way to incorporate lots of nasty adults into the mix. There's also a group of really evil kids who look like they're in their mid-twenties, and are allowed first crack at Shale before he throws them out the library window.
This is no MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS or DEAD POETS' SOCIETY, and no one is going to mistake Berenger for Richard Dreyfuss or Robin Williams. In fact, with all the firepower employed in and around the school, THE SUBSTITUTE might easily have been called GOODBYE MR. CLIPS. At one point, there's actually an attempt to espouse some kind of message about kids breaking the cycle of violence. "Gang funerals -- is that what you want for yourselves? For your kids?" demands Shale in one heartbreakingly poignant scene. (Brings a tear to the eye, doesn't it?) Not much is done with this theme beyond the redemption of a few minor characters, which is probably a good thing, since audiences don't come to this sort of movie for drama.
THE SUBSTITUTE has its moments, all of which fall in the realm of high camp. One scene not to be missed: Shale, attempting to get his class' attention, roars, "I'm the warrior chief! I'm the merciless god who rules over everything that stirs in my universe!" It's a hilarious moment, and I'm reasonably certain the director intended for it to be so. Nevertheless, aside from a lot of only moderately-satisfying violence, THE SUBSTITUTE comes across as rather lame. It's not boring, but that dubious qualification isn't enough to earn the movie a passing grade.
