United States, 1996 Running Length: 1:27 MPAA Classification: No MPAA /96
Cast: Peter Alexander, Jeri Arrendondo, Henry Gibson, Diana Larkin, Michael Stipe, Bok Yun Chon Director: Christopher Munch Producer: Andrea Sperling Screenplay: Christopher Munch Cinematography: Rob Sweeney
COLOR OF A BRISK AND LEAPING DAY won a deserved cinematography award at the 1996 Sundance Film Festival. This movie, shot in black- and-white, makes brilliant use of grays and shadows to create a tapestry of unparalleled visual impact. Unfortunately, the tale unfolded by these images is both pedestrian and incomplete, with a number of frustrating narrative holes that writer/director Christopher Munch feels no need to plug.
This is the story of "John Lee, Railroad Man" (Peter Alexander). Lee, an Asian American living in post-World War II California, is concerned about the possible demise of the 78-mile long Yosemite Valley Rail Road, which has been in operation since 1907. Despite his father's almost-contemptuous skepticism, Lee throws all of his efforts into saving the railroad from liquidation. When he finds a financial backer, Lee takes over the day-to-day operations himself. But even his enthusiasm can't stop the inevitable.
Although the main storyline concentrates on the railroad, COLOR OF A BRISK AND LEAPING DAY is more about Lee's awakening. Before he comes to Yosemite, his life is without direction, he's involved in an incestuous relationship with his sister, and he's unable to admit love for any woman. Once away from his family and involved in a cause that engages his passion as well as his skills, he becomes a new person. No longer emotionally crippled, he is able to fall in love and live a full, healthy life.
Despite a certain thematic richness, COLOR OF A BRISK AND LEAPING DAY has a multitude of problems. It does such a poor job of illustrating Lee's various relationships (with his parents, his sister, and his girlfriend) that they all feel contrived. In fact, there's virtually no interpersonal interaction that exhibits any semblance of emotional depth. Characters come and go with frustrating irregularity. We never have much of a feeling for anyone except Lee, and he's such a cold fish that his supposed passion for the railroad is never effectively conveyed. Actor Peter Alexander, who plays the lead, is a study in blandness.
The film is a visual marvel, especially considering its meager budget. Archive footage is blended seamlessly with new material, making it seem like Munch had a lot more money to work with. Ultimately, however, it's difficulty for me to summon up much enthusiasm for this picture. If you search hard enough, good cinematography isn't that difficult to come by; good stories are. COLOR OF A BRISK AND LEAPING DAY has the former, but not the latter.
