Spain/France, 1994 Running Length: 1:28 MPAA Classification: No MPAA /96, 5/9/96, 5/11/96
Cast: Biel Duran, Mathilda May, Gerard Darmon, Miguel Poveda, Albert Folch, Laura Mana Director: Bigas Luna Producer: Xavier Gelin Screenplay: Bigas Luna and Cuca Canals Cinematography: Jose Luis Alcaine Music: Nicola Piovani In Spanish with subtitles
"Could I have your breast?" may not be the most conventional opening line, but, surprisingly enough for young Tete (Biel Duran), it actually works. Seconds later, Estrellita (Mathilda May) has lowered her top, and the kid finds himself eye-to-nipple with the "most beautiful breast" he has ever seen. What's more, when he asks for a drink, Estrellita is more than happy to oblige with a stream of milk. Is this a dream or reality? THE TIT AND THE MOON never makes it clear, but, given the strange way that the plot progresses, I'm inclined to believe the latter.
The title is certainly provocative enough, and, as one might suspect, a lot of breasts are exposed during the ninety-minute running time. Most of them are pretty nice, too, making this Spanish-language release an ogler's delight. The film is intended to be a randy farce, and, when it succeeds, that's what it is. Unfortunately, there are also significant stretches when it's rather dull and silly.
I guess my tastes don't match those of director Bigas Luna. I feel much the same about THE TIT AND THE MOON as I did about his 1992 feature, JAMON, JAMON (although, to be fair, I enjoyed this one a little more). In between, he did something called GOLDEN BALLS, and, while I missed that one, the title indicates it's just another variation on similar themes. Luna's films are thick with sex and naked bodies, but his plotlines are shallow.
The story, such as it is, takes place in Cantalonia, where Tete works as an anxanta, the boy who climbs to the top of human pyramids. When Tete's mother gives birth to a new son, the older boy suffers from an acute case of envy that his brother has a breast to suckle. One night, Tete begs the moon for a breast of his own. His pleas are soon answered when Estrellita, the "Queen of Stuttgart", and her husband, Fartman Maurice, the "Fire King" (Gerard Darmon), arrive in town to perform at the Cava Park nightclub. But Tete has a rival for Estrellita's affections. Lovesick Miguel (Miguel Poveda), a local electrician, spends all night serenading his beloved with flamenco songs.
For roughly thirty minutes, THE TIT AND THE MOON plays like an offbeat coming-of-age story, and, as such, is absurdly entertaining. Tete is a strange child, but he has several endearing qualities -- curiosity, earnestness, and a kind of naivete. Unfortunately, the film veers way off course before the halfway point, concentrating on a completely uninvolving love triangle featuring Estrellita, the Fartman, and Miguel. For long stretches during the second half, Tete's sole function is to sneak around peeking at half-naked women while providing a wise-beyond-his-years voiceover.
When it comes to tasteless, off-the-wall humor, Luna rivals Benny Hill. Unfortunately, the director is handicapped by a pointlessly foolish storyline. Ultimately, THE TIT AND THE MOON provides exactly what you'd expect from a motion picture with that title.
