Cast: Gila Almagor, Yossef Shiloah, Miki Kam, Aryeh Moskona, Anat Wakssman, Alon Aboutbul, Dana Berger, Esti Zackheim, Icho Avital, Dror Keren, Shoshana Douar Director: Sheri Zarhin Producers: Michael Sharfstein, Amitan Manelzon Screenplay: Sheri Zarhin Cinematography: Amnon Zalait Music: Adi Cohen In Hebrew with subtitles
PASSOVER FEVER follows the trials and tribulations of a secular Israeli family as they gather for the traditional holiday celebration. As is true every year, Yona and Michael Starr are hosting the event. In addition to the middle aged couple, present in the house are three sons, one daughter, one son-in-law, two daughters-in-law, one ex-daughter-in- law, one possible soon-to-be-daughter-in-law, two grandsons, two granddaughters, one baby, and one mother. There are almost as many stories as there are people. In many ways, PASSOVER FEVER is reminiscent of Jodie Foster's HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS. In this case, however, the script is better written, with believable characters and situations.
A bleak undercurrent lurks beneath PASSOVER FEVER's seemingly-light tone. Like MURIEL'S WEDDING, Sheri Zarhin's feature uses comedy to address serious subjects. This film is neither relentlessly cheerful nor unbearably downbeat, but somewhere in the middle. However, in striving for numerous issues of substance, PASSOVER FEVER may overreach itself. With so many subplots and characters, it's difficult to devote enough screen time to any of them.
Yona suspects that Michael may be unfaithful. One of the Starr children, Nathaniel, is divorcing his wife, who is well-liked by everyone in the family. To further complicate matters, Nathaniel brings his new girlfriend to Passover dinner with him. One of the grandchildren can't speak as the result of some psychological trauma, another is praying for snow, and a third feels horribly neglected. A daughter-in-law, who is battling weight problems, becomes increasingly despondent as she feels she's the butt of everyone else's jokes. And, above all these proceedings looms the ghost of Yizhar, the twin brother of Yona and Michael's son, Shaim, who died two years ago in an army accident. As things turn out, this Passover gathering becomes about making peace with the dead.
Sheri Zarhin has crafted a diverting drama that is almost entirely devoid of political overtones. Its themes are universal, and can be easily understood by any viewer, regardless of race or nationality. Zarhin has assembled a fine cast (including well-known Israeli actress Gila Almagor) and gotten the most out of his $700,000 budget. The result is a satisfying chronicle of the kind of crazy, unpredictable holiday gathering that just about everyone can relate to.
