Once upon a time, Quentin Tarantino was a hot writer/director. His first and second films, RESERVOIR DOGS and PULP FICTION, wowed audiences worldwide, and made him a "can't-miss" commodity. Then, for some reason, he decided to concentrate on acting. Problem: he can't act. That didn't stop him, so movie-goers have been forced to endure Tarantino mugging for the camera in such titles as DESTINY TURNS ON THE RADIO, FOUR ROOMS, FROM DUSK TILL DAWN, and DESPERADO. Not content with writing, directing, and acting, Tarantino decided that he wanted to get into the film releasing business. So was born Rolling Thunder, a Miramax imprint. The first film released under this label was CHUNGKING EXPRESS, a sublimely thoughtful (if somewhat confusing) import. No such praise can be heaped upon SWITCHBLADE SISTERS, Rolling Thunder entry #2. A 1975 exploitation dud, this is the kind of movie Cinemax screens late at night. It's not just bad, it's execrable. If this is the kind of flick that Tarantino enjoyed while working at the video store, it's amazing that RESERVOIR DOGS turned out so well.
The plot of SWITCHBLADE SISTERS, such as it is, involves gang wars and in-fighting between the girls of the Dagger Debs (who are renamed the Jezebels mid-way through the film). These Switchblade Sisters have at least three problems: a rival gang leader (with the unforgettable name of Crabs) who wants them dead, a traitor in their midst, and a pair of cops (or, in the language of the day, pigs) who are waiting to bust them. The two lead Jezebels, Lace (Robbie Lee) and Maggie (Joanne Nail), are fighting over the same guy, Silver Daggers stud-leader, Dom (Asher Brauner), who knocks up one of them and forces himself on the other. Strangely, however, when Dom gets blown away by a blast from Crabs' gun, both Lace and Maggie want to waste Crabs, instead of shaking his hand.
Leather and lace. Studded boots and bell bottoms. An electro- disco score. Roller skating rinks. Afros. SWITCHBLADE SISTERS reeks of the worst excesses of the '70s. Calling it dated is an understatement. This is the kind of film that '90s movies delight in parodying. There's a certain campy value to a production like this (especially twenty years later), but only for about the first thirty minutes. Then things get repetitive and dull. This movie is too lifeless and amateurish to be enjoyable for long. If you want good, well-made, high-energy camp, check out any of Russ Meyer's films. Meyer (FASTER, PUSSYCAT! KILL! KILL!) made good bad stuff. Director Jack Hill (who was also responsible for THE SWINGING CHEERLEADERS) specialized in bad bad movies.
This is one of those rare movies where every member of the cast turns in an unbearably bad performance. There isn't anything remotely competent about any of the actors. The only one I recognized was Asher Brauner -- I think he was in a soap opera during the late '70s. Robbie Lee has a helium voice that is reminiscent of fingernails scraping across a blackboard. Joanne Nail looks like she could have been one of CHARLIE'S ANGELS (according to the production notes, she turned down the opportunity). All the actors literally snarl every line of dialogue. Then again, if I had to say the kind of inane lines they're given, I might be in a snarling mood, too.
One of the most laughable aspects of this film is that all the characters are supposed to be high school students, but the oldest actors are pushing 30. I guess some of them got held back a few times. There's a classic catfight where the Dagger Debs do battle with a nasty prison matron. During the tussle, we get a pretty good look at a stuntman in a wig. Maybe this scene inspired a similar moment in Keenan Ivory Wayans' I'M GONNA GIT YOU SUCKA. And, of course, there's also the gratuitous topless scene, when one of the girls gets her shirt ripped off.
I won't completely dismiss this as celluloid tripe. For those who are inexplicably infatuated with the '70s, SWITCHBLADE SISTERS gives a glimpse of a different aspect of the era's pop culture than what is typically portrayed through nostalgia-tinged lenses. It's cheap, tawdry, and practically unwatchable, but some viewers will undoubtedly enjoy it -- after all, Tarantino can't be the only SWITCHBLADE SISTERS fan, can he? For my money, I'd prefer sitting through just about anything else currently playing in theaters -- even THE CABLE GUY. SWITCHBLADE SISTERS doesn't cut it on any level.
