Cast: Matthew McConaughey, Samuel L. Jackson, Sandra Bullock, Kevin Spacey, Oliver Platt, Brenda Fricker, Charles S. Dutton, Ashley Judd, Donald Sutherland, Kiefer Sutherland, Patrick McGoohan, M. Emmett Walsh, Kurtwood Smith Director: Joel Schumacher Producers: Arnon Milchan, Michael Nathanson, Hunt Lowry, and John Grisham Screenplay: Akiva Goldsman based on the novel by John Grisham Cinematography: Peter Menzies Jr. Music: Elliot Goldenthal U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
Consider this situation: your daughter has just been raped and beaten. The two men who attacked her have been apprehended, but are likely to be set free. You are a Vietnam vet with combat training and have access to an M-16. What do you do? Sit by and hope that the fickle American courts decide the issue based on who has the best lawyer, or take decisive action now? Author John Grisham recognized that this scenario would make for a compelling tale, so, during the late 1980s, after spicing it up by including themes of racial tension and capital punishment, he wrote A TIME TO KILL. Seven years later, the film version of the writer's first book has reached the screen.
Grisham has stated publicly that A TIME TO KILL has the most personal meaning of any of his works, and, as a result, he demanded a measure of creative control in the movie-making process. So, with Joel Schumacher (THE CLIENT, BATMAN FOREVER) at the helm and Akiva Goldsman (THE CLIENT) credited with the screenplay, Grisham is listed as one of four producers. And, while aspects of the script differ from details in the book, the overall storyline is very similar. This is fortunate, because, of all Grisham's novels, A TIME TO KILL is the one best suited to generating a compelling motion picture.
It's possible to argue all day about how much of the race issue in A TIME TO KILL is a legitimate exploration of black/white tension, and how much is sensationalism used to spice up the story. The KKK has a prominent role, but couldn't a more moderate, less universally-despised group have filled a similar function? There are times when A TIME TO KILL preaches, but isn't Schumacher aiming the sermon at the converted? The movie clearly touches on some important social issues, but it's up to the viewer to dig beneath the propaganda and unearth the messages that mean something. Then again, it's worth noting that this Hollywood production is actually saying something, rather than just churning out eye-popping special effects while relying on a regurgitated plot.
The basic setup has 10-year old Tonya Hailey, the daughter of Carl Lee Hailey (Samuel L. Jackson), being raped and beaten by two rednecks. Taking the law into his own hands, Carl Lee guns down the pair in front of dozens of witnesses in the Canton, Mississippi courthouse. In the process, he also seriously injures a local deputy (Chris Cooper, star of John Sayles' LONESTAR). Carl Lee is arrested for the double murder, and faces trial. For his attorney, he chooses a local white lawyer, up-and- coming hotshot Jake Brigance (Matthew McConaughey). With a team that includes a sleazy divorce specialist, Harry Rex Vonner (Oliver Platt), an energetic assistant, Ellen Roarke (Sandra Bullock), and his old mentor, Lucien Wilbanks (Donald Sutherland), Jake goes up against the local DA (Kevin Spacey). When the KKK become involved, Jake discovers that his life, and the lives of everyone close to him, including his wife (Ashley Judd) and daughter, are in danger. And the defense of Carl Lee Hailey has just begun...
Even with a one-hundred fifty minute running time, A TIME TO KILL is perhaps too ambitious. In remaining faithful to the novel, the movie gives us too many characters and themes, and some of both get lost in the cracks. Take Jake's secretary (played by Brenda Fricker), for example. She's superfluous -- remove her and nothing changes. Then there's the issue of capital punishment. Jake and Ellen debate the subject, but it's a perfunctory argument that doesn't do much for either side.
Still, despite my reservations, it's impossible to deny that A TIME TO KILL is well-directed, expertly paced, and largely entertaining. Thankfully, grandstanding during the trial is kept to a minimum. Hollywood loves all sorts of twists and surprises in court dramas; Grisham has kept these to a minimum. There are a few, primarily to keep the audience interested, but nothing so outlandish that we leave the theater shaking our heads in disbelief. With respect to the filmed versions of Grisham's other novels (THE FIRM, THE PELICAN BRIEF, and THE CLIENT), there's no comparison -- this one is much better.
The most compelling question raised by the film is whether Carl Lee, as a black man, can get a fair trial from a white judge and jury. As it turns out, he hires Jake because Jake is white. "You see me as they see me," he tells the attorney. "If you was on that jury, what would it take for you to set me free?" Ultimately, A TIME TO KILL shies away from offering a definitive answer. Perhaps, under the circumstances, it's not a question that can be answered definitively.
A TIME TO KILL attracted a top-notch cast with star power and ability to match. Sandra Bullock, as appealing as ever, gets top billing, but the real lead is Matthew McConaughey, who mixes intensity and natural talent with good looks. Samuel L. Jackson is excellent as Carl Lee, radiating a palpable outrage and grief. The supporting cast includes such luminaries as Ashley Judd, Kevin Spacey, Donald Sutherland, Charles S. Dutton, and M. Emmett Walsh. From top to bottom, everyone does a credible job.
There's not a lot of real tension about what the verdict is going to be, although the film unsuccessfully tries to lead us astray. But there are enough interesting side-issues going on that there's no fear of a viewer losing interest. Despite certain drawbacks, A TIME TO KILL is involving, energetic, and occasionally thought-provoking. All things considered, this film will make for a worthwhile trip to the cinema for all, not just those who have time to kill.
