Cast: Shaquille O'Neal, Francis Capra, Ally Walker, James Acheson, John Costello Director: Paul M. Glaser Producers: Scott Kroopf, Paul M. Glaser, and Bob Engelman Screenplay: Christian Ford & Roger Soffer based on a story by Paul M. Glaser Cinematography: Charles Minsky Music: Christopher Tyng U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
Some motion pictures aren't worth the celluloid they're printed on. KAZAAM, a genie-in-a-boombox fable featuring basketball superstar Shaquille O'Neal, is such a film. This is as witless as movies come -- an unamusing, moronic blend of horrible acting and inept screenwriting. I doubt that many people born before 1987 will find anything worthwhile about this, one of Disney's worst live-action offerings.
Those who endure KAZAAM's torturous ninety minutes will find themselves desperately wishing that writers Christian Ford and Roger Soffer had generated a script exhibiting a moment's intelligence or originality. Alas, this film doesn't even rise to the level of a bad made-for-TV movie. By comparison, the old Barbara Eden series, I DREAM OF JEANNIE, was the height of wit and sophistication.
The story, which has loose connections to Disney's animated hit, ALADDIN (but doesn't deserve to be mentioned in the same breath), details the trials and tribulations of one young boy and his pet genie. Max Connor (Francis Capra), an obnoxious, self-centered, twelve-year old punk, finds Kazaam (Shaquille O'Neal), a genie confined in a boombox, when some bullies from school chase him into an abandoned building. At first, Max doesn't believe in Kazaam's supernatural powers, but, when the big, strangely-garbed man rains fast food all over the young boy, he changes his mind. So, as Max considers what his wishes should be, he and Kazaam bond. And, as the genie dabbles in rap music, Max defies his long-suffering mother (Ally Walker) to track down his no-good father (James Acheson), who abandoned him ten years ago.
There's no doubt that KAZAAM was designed exclusively to draw upon the popularity of O'Neal. This is his second feature role (he played a top basketball prospect in BLUE CHIPS), and he hams it up big time, exhibiting a lot of energy, but not nearly as much talent. Unfortunately, O'Neal gives the best performance in the film, which says all that's necessary about the level of acting. Francis Capra, who was believable in Robert De Niro's A BRONX TALE (he played the younger version of the protagonist), is woeful here, apparently trying to do his best to imitate Jonathan Taylor Thomas. His Max is annoying from the beginning, and it's difficult to imagine anyone caring about, let alone sympathizing with, this kid. Ally Walker and James Acheson, as the divorced parents, are as flat and uninteresting as a blank sheet of paper.
KAZAAM, like most Disney live-action features, does its share of too-obvious product placement. Pepsi and M&M's both get a generous number of shots. Of course, the whole film is an ad for O'Neal -- basketball star, headline-grabber, rapper, movie producer (he gets an "executive producer" credit), and actor. Apparently, there's nothing this guy can't do.
KAZAAM consistently pushes all the wrong buttons. The feeble moralizing about friendship only speeds the curdling of an already offensive mixture. This is artificial, formulaic film making at its most blatant, and far worse than anything previously turned out by director Paul M. Glaser (who, after his stint as Starsky in STARSKY AND HUTCH, directed THE CUTTING EDGE, among other efforts). KAZAAM deserves to be slam-dunked down a garbage chute, never to be heard from again.
