Germany, 1994 Release date: beginning 7/96 (limited) Running Length: 1:33 MPAA Classification: R (Sexual situations, frank sexual language) Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Til Schweiger, Joachim Krol, Katja Riemann, Rufus Beck, Antonia Lang Director: Sonke Wortmann Producer: Bernd Eichinger Screenplay: Sonke Wortmann Cinematography: Gernot Roll Music: Torsten Breuer U.S. Distributor: Orion Pictures Classics
Although Sonke Wortmann's 1994 German film has a few things going for it, it's hard to understand why it was such a big hit in its native country. In addition to possessing a plot that approaches sexual issues (both homosexual and heterosexual) with refreshing candor and unselfconsciousness, MAYBE...MAYBE NOT boasts the presence of Katja Riemann (MAKING UP!), one of the best young German actresses working today. Unfortunately, these assets can't bandage the film's fundamental flaw. As a comedy, it's only sporadically funny, and, as a drama, it lacks emotional depth.
MAYBE...MAYBE NOT is clumsily constructed. It meanders, and doesn't seem to have a clear goal, except to say that it's possible for a gay man and a straight man to be friends without sleeping together. That's not an especially compelling statement, and this isn't an overly- interesting forum in which to present it. The conclusion is open-ended, and, while that might be okay for a more serious film, it's a drawback for something attempting to be a light comedy.
The film begins with Doro (Riemann) discovering her live-in lover, Axel (Til Schweiger), having sex with another woman in the bathroom at their workplace. Doro's reaction is to kick Axel out of her house, so he spends the rest of the day looking for a place to crash. Eventually, he moves in with Norbert (Joachim Krol), a gay friend-of-a-friend-of-a- friend. Norbert, a shy, nerdy sort of guy, is not-so-secretly attracted to Axel, but the hunky hetero either doesn't notice, or pretends not to (the film never makes it clear which is the case).
After Axel has been gone for several days, Doro decides that she misses him, and, when a home pregnancy test reads positive, she begins searching for him. In the meantime, Axel is learning about the gay lifestyle, although he remains fairly secure in his heterosexuality, despite Norbert's attempts to "convert" him. Ultimately, MAYBE...MAYBE NOT becomes a showdown of sorts between Doro and Norbert for who captures Axel's affections.
I think we're supposed to identify with the Axel, although it's difficult to say for sure, because he's such a self-centered jerk. It's far easier to relate to the Doro, the neglected girlfriend, or Norbert, the lonely gay man, but neither comes close to matching Axel for screen time. MAYBE...MAYBE NOT is his film, but he's the least likable person in it. It's tough to enjoy a movie like this -- especially one that's supposed to be a comedy -- when you have to work not to hate the main character.
Most of the genuinely funny moments arise out of familiar comic setups: the stranger hiding in the closet, a case of mistaken identity, and someone arriving home earlier than expected. Although there are laughs to be had from each of these situations, it's easy (bordering on cheap) humor. More interesting are Wortmann's sly observations of how the homosexual culture stereotypes the heterosexual one. Too often, however, the jokes fall flat. It doesn't take much insight to identify the numerous failed attempts at humor.
The acting is good, even if character development is weak. Outside of the main trio, we're given a raft of types, including a drag queen (Rufus Beck) who makes the population of STONEWALL seem that much more real, and a nymphomaniac (Antonia Lang) who's every heterosexual male's dream. MAYBE...MAYBE NOT certainly has good intentions, but, as every movie-goer knows, that's only a starting point. This film does little to build on its foundation. When it comes to seeing this movie, "maybe not" seems the best advice.
