Cast: Jerry O'Connell, Megan Ward, Jim Turner, Sandra Denton, Robert Vaughn, Don Ho Director: John Payson Producers: Diana Phillips, Bonni Lee Screenplay: John Payson based on the MTV short film Cinematography: Peter Deming Music: Carter Burwell U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
JOE'S APARTMENT started life as a short film on MTV. And, while I haven't seen that production, it seems about the right length for this premise, which is too thin to sustain a full-length feature. Even though JOE'S APARTMENT runs a slim seventy-nine minutes, it seems hopelessly padded. There's not enough story here for something half that length, so we're subjected to numerous pointless and irritating song-and-dance numbers designed to nudge the lame plot towards its conclusion.
The film doesn't start off badly. In fact, during the first half- hour, there's a quirky comic momentum. When we first meet Joe (Jerry O'Connell), he has just arrived in New York City from his home state of Iowa. He doesn't have much money, and what little he possesses, is quickly removed by the locals (JOE'S APARTMENT delights in lampooning the manners and morals of New York citizens). Soon, Joe is searching for a job and an affordable place to live -- neither of which is easy to find. But, through a series of absurd coincidences, Joe cons his way into a rent-controlled, East Village apartment. There's only one problem -- he has to share his pad with hundreds of singing, dancing cockroaches. And, when he decides to bring his new girlfriend, Lily (Megan Ward), home with him, the insect presence becomes a serious drawback to romance.
As I said, I like the way the film develops in the early stages, taking some chances and daring to be a little different. Not much of the comedy is uproarious, but JOE'S APARTMENT has a few clever moments, at least until it loses its edge. The cockroaches, which are the product of digital animation, are quite real-looking. They're a little less disturbing than the genuine article because they sound like Alvin and the Chipmunks. Unfortunately, the film makers seem inordinately fond of the little creatures, and, as a result, they quickly become overexposed.
The film's greatest failing, however, is the manner in which it treats its human characters. Joe is one of the least-interesting personalities to grace the screen this year. Despite being described as the "dirtiest freakin' slob on the planet", he seems remarkably clean, orderly, and well-groomed, although I suppose the occasional smear of dirt on his forehead is supposed to indicate that he never bathes. His girlfriend is equally bland, which means that the only two significant people in this film aren't worth more than a yawn or two. Together, these two are more potent than a Sominex.
"Big" cameos come from Robert Vaughn and Don Ho, which is a fair indication of the level of talent attracted by the script. Not since THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE has a film deteriorated this quickly. Good beginning aside, the ultimate result is that JOE'S APARTMENT is full of bugs.
