Cast: Keanu Reeves, Morgan Freeman, Rachel Weisz, Fred Ward, Kevin Dunn, Brian Cox, Joanna Cassidy Director: Andrew Davis Producers: Arne Schmidt and Andrew Davis Screenplay: Michael Bortman and J. F. Lawton Cinematography: Frank Tidy Music: Jerry Goldsmith U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
In the words of that eminently quotable maestro of malapropisms, Yogi Berra, "It's deja vu all over again."
After a brief hiccup that saw the releases of COURAGE UNDER FIRE, MULTIPLICITY, and A TIME TO KILL, we're right back into the thick of the action again. And, as has been the style all season, it's adrenaline without brains. Looking back to the summer's beginning with TWISTER, you can probably name about a dozen movies that belong in this group -- some of which were reasonably entertaining, some of which weren't. CHAIN REACTION is just the latest link.
Director Andrew Davis has lifted whole segments of CHAIN REACTION from another, better chase movie -- but at least he's had the good taste to steal from himself. Aspects of this film are likely to remind even the most oblivious movie-goer of THE FUGITIVE, which Davis also directed. There's the man on the run, the supposed friend who's not as helpful as he first seems, and the lawman who, despite pursuing the protagonist, is actually on his side.
Unfortunately, the hero, Eddie Kasalivich, is played by Keanu Reeves, not Harrison Ford, and it's fair to say that the two are not in the same class as actors. Eddie, a machinist, works at the University of Chicago on the "Hydrogen Energy Project". The man in charge of the project, Paul Shannon (Morgan Freeman), seems like a nice, helpful person -- which probably means he's anything but that. One night, while working late, Eddie arrives at the solution to a problem that has been plaguing the project since its inception. Following this breakthrough, the scientists have at their fingertips a method of producing stable hydrogen from ordinary water -- "cheap, clean, abundant energy" which has the potential of making fossil fuels obsolete. Someone, however, doesn't want the formula to get out, and they're willing to murder, not to mention destroy an eight-block area of Chicago's south side, to bury the secret. Eddie soon finds himself, along with an attractive female physicist, Lily Sinclair (Rachel Weisz), framed for murder, and on the run from an FBI team led by the no-nonsense Inspector Ford (Fred Ward).
Yes, the plot contains some interesting elements, but, when all is said and done, they're only window dressing for the elaborate chase sequences. This isn't a thought-provoking motion picture interested in exploring fertile territory; it's a reasonably straightforward action feature. If you don't believe me, just count the number of explosions, gun shots, and fights.
In its defense, CHAIN REACTION has an excellent first half hour. There's a satisfying explosion that levels a significant portion of south Chicago (although, based on the low number of casualties, this part of the city appears to be largely uninhabited) and a well-paced foot chase along Michigan Avenue that ends with a race up an opening draw bridge. Unfortunately, after that, CHAIN REACTION settles into a comfortable, routine rhythm that lasts until the rousing conclusion.
As in SPEED, Reeves' acting limitations aren't a severe liability, since the part of Eddie doesn't require great range. On the other hand, Rachel Weisz (one of the best things about STEALING BEAUTY) is reasonably impressive. While Reeves' Eddie faces adversity with a blase attitude, Weisz' Lily appears frightened, bewildered, and vulnerable. The actress takes her token female sidekick role and develops a character of some substance out of it. In fact, given the obvious constraints, it's hard to imagine anyone doing anything more with Lily. Meanwhile, Morgan Freeman basically re-creates his OUTBREAK personae. Freeman always has an arresting screen presence, but this isn't one of his more challenging parts. Fred Ward, while no Tommy Lee Jones, is adequate as the sympathetic FBI agent.
Aside from the lip service paid to the pros and cons of releasing free hydrogen onto the world market, CHAIN REACTION doesn't contain anything that we haven't already seen this summer. The explosive destruction that wipes out a portion of Chicago looks like it could have been excised from INDEPENDENCE DAY. The action sequences recall MISSION IMPOSSIBLE, ERASER, and THE ROCK, albeit with less energy. The concept of government agents being bad guys has been used so often that it has long since turned into a tired cliche. CHAIN REACTION isn't dull -- the film is paced to keep audiences attentive -- but the lack of originality dampens its enjoyability. As a result, box office reaction will almost certainly be more like a spark than an explosion.
