Cast: Whoopi Goldberg, Gerard Depardieu, Haley Joel Osment, Denis Mercier, Andrea Martin, Nancy Travis, Ute Lemper, Sheryl Lee Ralph Director: Norman Jewison Producers: Norman Jewison, Arnon Milchan, and Jeff Rothberg Screenplay: Alvin Sargent Cinematography: David Watkin Music: Marc Shaiman U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
With the advent of the fall, relief from the past season's nonstop action is on the way. Officially, BOGUS is still a summer movie, but it has little in common with the recent bulk of mainstream releases. With a director like Norman Jewison (MOONSTRUCK) at the helm, it shouldn't be a surprise that BOGUS is well-realized and thoughtful, but, given the number of movies that have gone wrong over the last few months, it's refreshing to see something that lives up to its promise.
BOGUS is a lightly-dramatic fantasy much in the tradition of Frank Capra's fare. For the most part, this film is sentimental without being mawkish, and only at the very end is there a brief, and largely inoffensive, slip into melodrama. BOGUS handles its subject matter -- loss, loneliness, and the need for a friend -- with admirable restraint, never employing the kind of relentless manipulation that can easily turn off the seasoned movie-goer. Jewison is in control not only of tone and pace, but of his actors, as well. This results in a string of strong performances.
As the film opens, we're introduced to Lorraine Franklin (Nancy Travis), a bubbly single mom with a delightful, seven-year old son, Albert (Haley Joel Osment). Lorraine is part of the Circus Phantastique, a traveling band of performers currently based in Las Vegas. Albert has formed an attachment with the group's magician, Antoine (Denis Mercier), who acts as a substitute father. When Lorraine is killed in a traffic accident, Albert finds himself alone in the world. Antoine helps him with his grief, but he cannot be a full-time caretaker, and the young boy faces becoming a ward of the state.
To avoid that eventuality, Lorraine had drafted a will of sorts that names her one-time foster-sister, Harriet (Whoopi Goldberg), as Albert's guardian. Reluctantly, Harriet agrees to take the boy in, even though, by her own admission, she doesn't have a "motherly bone" in her body. Indeed, Harriet is not a good parent, and, to compensate for her inadequacies and fill a void in his life, Albert invents a good-natured, invisible friend named Bogus (Gerard Depardieu), who follows him around, offering advice and comfort. Harriet, of course, doesn't believe in Bogus' existence, but a series of events makes her question her views of reality.
It's said that many intelligent, creative children invent imaginary friends. Considering that Albert has just lost his mother and surrogate family, and has been forced to move to Newark, New Jersey (ugh!), he has plenty of reasons to dream up Bogus. As the movie unfolds, we learn that, despite the weighty subject matter, BOGUS isn't a downer. It's a magical excursion into the worlds of imagination and potential. Lorraine's death is just the starting point -- the real story is about how Albert and Harriet grow close and learn that neither of them is so different from the other after all.
Whoopi Goldberg, who seems determined to act here rather than just rely on her goofy personality, turns in a sympathetic and multi-layered performance. It has been a long time since her work has reached this level, perhaps going back as far as THE COLOR PURPLE. Meanwhile, with BOGUS, Gerard Depardieu has finally found a solid English-language role to place aside his numerous critically-acclaimed French parts. Forget GREEN CARD and MY FATHER THE HERO -- BOGUS shows why the actor is internationally respected. His ability to mix light comedy with pathos makes Bogus more than just a cardboard character. Then there's Haley Joel Osment, who has as much charisma and screen presence as any under- ten performer. Osment is occasionally a little too cute, but such a minor flaw can be forgiven considering the maturity of his acting.
BOGUS is a well-crafted and moving motion picture. In striving for moderation rather than melodrama, Jewison has crafted a feature that touches the heart in a special place. The film asks, but doesn't answer, the question of whether the process of growing up is worth the sacrifice of innocence and trust. The director doesn't attempt too much, and his weaving of several themes into one is masterfully handled. Children and adults of all ages will be enchanted by this movie, which is the exact opposite of its title.
