Cast: Sinbad, Brock Pierce, Blake Boyd, Robert Guillaume, James Naughton, Lisa Eichorn, Timothy Busfield, Art La Fleur, Zachary Ty Bryan, Bill Cobbs, Erin Williby Director: David Mickey Evans Producers: Roger Birnbaum and Riley Kathryn Ellis Screenplay: Tim Kelleher Cinematography: Anthony B. Richmond Music: Richard Gibbs U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
Chelsea Clinton must have it rough. In addition to dealing with all the normal problems of adolescence, she has the added pressure of constantly being in the world's spotlight. And, unlike child movie and TV stars, this isn't something she chose -- it's a role that was thrust upon her. Though it may be slim consolation, at least her situation isn't as bleak as that of Luke Davenport (Brock Pierce), the title character of Disney's latest lame-brained live-action feature, FIRST KID. Not only does he have a similar home situation to Chelsea, but, on top of that, he gets publically humiliated by a school bully (Zachary Ty Bryan) and threatened by a gun-weilding psycho at the mall.
To me, the concept of making a movie about the child of a president seems like a good idea. There's a dramatic goldmine inherent in the situation. The teen years are a time of rebellion; how does a presidential son or daughter react to having their every minor infraction appear on the nightly news? And much does it hurt to see their father and mother's names dragged through the mud? While a great film could be made from this subject matter, FIRST KID isn't it. Disney doesn't want hard-hitting, WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE-type realism. They want lightweight, feel-good family fare -- the kind of movie that can turn a modest profit without offending anyone.
Part of the problem is that, despite the title, this film isn't so much about the First Son as it is about his secret agent, Sam Simms. Simms is played by Sinbad, and this is obviously a vehicle for the comic-turned-actor. In fact, it's his second starring role for Disney - - he last appeared in the wretched HOUSEGUEST, which played like a feature-length commercial for McDonalds. Not to be outdone this time around, Sinbad has two significant product plugs: one for Duncan Donuts and one for Coca Cola. You'd have to be blind or asleep to miss either.
The story, shallow and feeble as it is, has 13-year old Luke going off to high school during an election year. Luke is resentful that his parents (James Naughton and Lisa Eichorn) are always out on the campaign trail, and he takes out his frustration on the Secret Service agents assigned to protect him. Agent Woods (Timothy Busfield) loses his job, and his replacement, Simms (who already has "a file full of borderline regulation infractions"), is headed in the same direction until he makes a remarkable discovery. All Luke really wants is a friend. So, by becoming co-conspirators in breaking White House rules (they sneak off to a Washington gym where Luke takes boxing lessons), they develop a deep and meaningful bond. Meanwhile, at school, Luke falls for a pretty classmate (Erin Williby) and suffers all the typical anxiety of asking her out on a date.
Not everything in FIRST KID is bad. There are times when we feel for Luke, although never as deeply as we should. It probably would have helped if he hadn't started out the film as such a dislikeable brat. And some of Sinbad's comic antics can't help but be funny -- this guy has got an abundance of charisma. Unfortunately, comedy and light drama aren't the only things on FIRST KID's agenda. The film ends with an extended action sequence that is (unintentionally) more laughable than Sinbad's best routine. We get to see the star do his Clint Eastwood imitation by getting IN THE LINE OF FIRE.
By aiming his film at children, director David Mickey Evans strips the movie of all potentially interesting elements, leaving behind material likely to appeal to only the least discriminating viewers. Then again, most Disney live-action features are about the same, so there shouldn't be any real surprises where FIRST KID is concerned. The just-completed Democratic National Convention was better-scripted than this film.
