Cast: Damon Wayans, Adam Sandler, James Caan, James Farentino, Kristen Wilson, Bill Nunn, Mark Roberts Director: Ernest Dickerson Producers: Robert Simonds Screenplay: Lewis Colick, Joe Gayton Cinematography: Steven Bernstein Music: Elmer Bernstein U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
On paper, it sounds like a strange idea: Damon Wayans and Adam Sandler paired in a 48 HOURS/LETHAL WEAPON-type buddy/action film. Of course, this isn't the first time two comic actors have done this sort of thing (for a recent example, recall Martin Lawrence and Will Smith in the better-to-be-forgotten BAD BOYS), and, to be fair, Wayans has previously appeared in shoot-'em-ups (like THE LAST BOY SCOUT, opposite Bruce Willis). Surprisingly, however, this unlikely match works, due primarily to the charisma of both participants. What doesn't hold up, however, is the ho-hum storyline that Wayans and Sandler find themselves stranded in.
Universal Pictures has labeled BULLETPROOF as a "comedy action film", and that's precisely what it is. The problem is, while some of the humor is very funny, there's nothing remotely interesting about the action stuff. It's all redundant and recycled, with a few feeble riffs added in a failed attempt to give things an original look. There are the usual car chases, foot chases, barroom brawls, and shootouts. The only thing to elevate the material slightly is the use of more elaborate jokes than the one-line wisecracks that permeate the genre.
The film's premise has undercover cop Jack Carter (a.k.a. Rock Keats, played by Damon Wayans) coming to the end of a one-year assignment that had him become best friends with criminal Archie Moses (Adam Sandler) in order to get the goods on drug lord Frank Colton (James Caan). During the warehouse drug deal where Jack's police sting concludes, things go wrong. Frank gets away, Archie accidentally shoots Jack in the head, and a number of people are killed. Running from both the police and Frank's men, Archie heads for Mexico. Before he gets there, however, he is picked up by Arizona authorities and agrees to a deal to inform against Frank. Meanwhile, Jack is recovering from his injury with the help of a beautiful therapist (Kristen Wilson). No sooner is he back on duty, however, when his captain (James Farentino) calls him into the office with a special assignment: bring in Archie. Jack agrees to the assignment under protest, but when he sets off for Arizona, Frank's men are close behind.
Jack and Archie's friendship forms BULLETPROOF's cornerstone. And, while cinematographer-turned-director Ernest Dickerson (JUICE) doesn't bring tears to our eyes by delving into the rich complexity of their relationship, he gets us to care about them. A secondary aspect of the film concentrates on the consequences of betrayal, and, while this subject matter is handled somewhat haphazardly, there is a nice little twist that emphasizes it.
At times, BULLETPROOF delights in parodying action staples, which makes it all the more disappointing that the film ultimately relies on so many of them in a straightforward, traditional fashion. The homoerotic subtext apparent in many "buddy movies" is toyed with in an inoffensive, over-the-top fashion, as is the formula necessitating that the bad guy has a mole working in the police department. (Could it be the captain? The DEA agent? The two tough-guy cops?) And, if you've seen the previews, you know how funny Adam Sandler's off-key rendition of "I'll Always Love You" (from THE BODYGUARD) is. That, and the entire sequence surrounding it, represents BULLETPROOF's indisputable high point.
Sandler and Wayans work so well together that a future teaming (with a more daring script) would be welcome. Another noteworthy performance is given by Mark Roberts, who has a brief-but-memorable comic turn as an off-the-wall desk clerk at the porno lodge where Rock and Archie take a room. James Caan, as yet another loud-mouthed tough guy with no redeemable features, mails in his portrayal. He may not be losing interest in this kind of role, but I'm getting bored of seeing him do it. Then there's Kristin Wilson, who, aside from her gorgeous eyes, brings little to the tired love interest role.
Largely because it provoked a few hearty laughs, I found myself enjoying BULLETPROOF more than I expected. With a little extra imagination invested in the action elements, this could have been a worthwhile "popcorn" endeavor. As things are, it's a marginal feature likely to appeal to those who don't demand much from their comedy action films. Anyone hoping for something more meaty will find that BULLETPROOF has a few too many holes.
