United States, 1996 U.S. Release Date: variable (limited) Running Length: 1:23 MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, nudity) Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Featuring Scott Bakatman, John Perry Barlow, Robert Ettinger, Robert Garland, Timothy Leary, and others Director: Iara Lee Producer: George Gund Cinematography: Toshifumi Furusawa, Marcus Hahn, and Kramer Morgenthau U.S. Distributor: Caipirinha Productions
The idea behind SYNTHETIC PLEASURES is fascinating enough: examine how rapid advances in technology are changing culture and civilization. It's a rich and varied subject with more depth than even a lengthy documentary could probe. And, at 83 minutes, SYNTHETIC PLEASURES is not long. That doesn't stop the film from attempting to touch on such varying topics as nanotechnology, artificial intelligence, cryonics, plastic beauty, virtual reality, nootropics, cyber sex, transhumanism, biotechnology, artificial nature, and terminal identity. Don't know what some of those terms mean? Well, even after seeing the movie, you probably still won't. Each is mentioned, briefly discussed (emphasis on "briefly"), then passed by. SYNTHETIC PLEASURES is a shallow, rapid- fire survey, not an in-depth essay.
There's a direct relationship between your ignorance of the material and how much you'll get out of the film. Computer-literate, technologically-minded individuals are likely to find much of SYNTHETIC PLEASURES insubstantial and trite. For those of us who are "in the know" (hence, most likely to be attracted by the premise), the film doesn't offer any revelations. It rehashes things that we've read about or experienced. On the other hand, those who don't understand how to set the clocks on their VCRs may be in for an eye-opening experience.
It's hard not to applaud director Iara Lee's intentions, even if the results are less-than-satisfying. There's at least enough here to spur a lengthy post-film discussion. Unfortunately, any such interaction is likely to be more compelling than the movie itself. One of the most distressing aspects of SYNTHETIC PLEASURES is that when it raises a truly thought-provoking issue, instead of staying with it, the film rushes on.
SYNTHETIC PLEASURES asks a lot of questions. Is cyber interaction a danger to interpersonal interaction? Are we creating an environment we won't be able to live in? Will increasing reliance upon computers add to the already-pervasive sense of alienation? Does a controlled life make for a better life, or does the unexpected make life worth living? However, not only are none of these questions answered, the film doesn't offer much of an opinion about them. We get occasional sound bytes from talking head experts, but that's all.
I was intrigued by a few of SYNTHETIC PLEASURES' observations, such as the direction Las Vegas weddings are taking ($30 drive up windows), the obsession with controlled environments in Japan (where they have a "Golf Dome", "Ski Dome", and "Ocean Dome"), and the level of faith that some people place in unproved technologies like cryonics. The film mentions so many issues that it can't help piquing everyone's curiosity at some point. For example, if you're wondering how close we are to the implant devices of STRANGE DAYS or the holodeck of STAR TREK, SYNTHETIC PLEASURES has something to say.
Visually, the film is unspectacular. Consisting mainly of crude computer animation, SYNTHETIC PLEASURES' look rapidly grows tedious. Since most of the information comes through a series of short interviews and the voiceover narration, it's possible to close your eyes and not miss much. For a movie that's about cutting-edge technology, it's ironic (although not surprising, considering the small budget Lee had) that the presentation is so technically limited.
Essentially, SYNTHETIC PLEASURES is an MTV-style documentary. When it comes to subject breadth, the movie is in good shape, but at no time does it attempt anything more ambitious than skimming the surface. Unfortunately, it's underneath, beyond SYNTHETIC PLEASURES' scope, where the really good stuff lies.
