United States, 1996 U.S. Release Date: beginnning 9/96 (limited) Running Length: 1:30 MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, sex, mature themes) Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Michael Imperioli, Mira Sorvino, Paul Calderon, Patrick Breen, Richard Bright, Billie Neal Director: Gary Winick Producers: Rick Bowman and Gary Winick Screenplay: Lee Drysdale Cinematography: Makoto Watanabe Music: Steven M. Stern U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
It's understandable if you think you've seen this story before, because, if you're any kind of regular movie-goer, you undoubtedly have. Drug dealing and addiction are common staples of '90s movies, and SWEET NOTHING follows a very predictable and familiar trajectory: the hero becomes an addict, watches helplessly as his life falls apart, then seeks redemption once he has lost everything. Perhaps one reason why this is such a popular premise is that it's such a frequent real-life occurrence. And, as long as there's something new or interesting in the experience, it's hard to argue with exploring these themes. SWEET NOTHING doesn't boast an outstanding script or innovative direction, but it has a pair of exceptionally strong performances, and that's enough to earn it a recommendation.
The film opens with a shot of a still-living man lying broken and beaten in a pool of his own blood. As it turns out, this is SWEET NOTHING's protagonist, Angel (Michael Imperioli). In terms of chronology, this is virtually the end, and, as a result, the bulk of the story is told in flashback (accompanied by an unnecessarily verbose voiceover). Angel is a crack addict and dealer who first gets into the drug world as a means of supplementing his legitimate income. With two kids and a wife, Monika (Mira Sorvino), to support, the extra $1000 a week comes in handy. Unfortunately, while dealing, he becomes a user as well, despite the warnings of his friend and boss, Raymond (Paul Calderon). He is trapped, always "chasing that first time high."
SWEET NOTHING looks at four aspects of the drug culture: the associated violence, the effects of addiction on the individual, the effects of addiction on the family, and the dangers of dealing. The storyline and directorial style are both relatively straightforward -- there are none of the flourishes associated with TRAINSPOTTING. SWEET NOTHING doesn't break any new ground, but, like all well-made, drug- related films, it does cause us to consider the incredible power and reach of any controlled substance.
Many "drug movies" are so dark and cynical that it's difficult, if not impossible, to care about the main characters. Not so here. Michael Imperioli plays Angel as a loving husband and father who has been seduced by the lure of getting a few more dollars for his family. It seems so easy and innocent at the beginning; everyone's doing it, Raymond advises. Even the possibility of addiction doesn't worry Angel -- he falls into the common trap of believing that he can stop just as easily as he started. Imperioli makes us see Angel as a good man with a tragic flaw, and, up to the very end, we're in sympathy with him.
Oscar-winner Mira Sorvino, who made this movie before MIGHTY APHRODITE, plays Monika with the same earnestness and vulnerability that she displayed in Whit Stillman's BARCELONA. She sees what's happening to her husband, but is powerless to stop it. And, though she loves him desperately, there are limits to what she's willing to endure. When violence threatens her children, she's had enough.
SWEET NOTHING isn't going to score any points with the drug using community, even though it's more of a character study than a "message" movie. There's certainly no preaching, although the scenes of Angel scheming, dealing, and stealing to get money for his next hit don't paint an appealing picture. Ultimately, SWEET NOTHING is simply the latest movie to explore the pervasive and destructive impact of drug use and drug-related crime on American society.
