Cast: Steven Seagal, Keenan Ivory Wayans, Bob Gunton, Brian Cox, Michelle Johnson, John Jackson, Stephen Tobolowsky Director: John Gray Producers: Julius R. Nasso and Steven Seagal Screenplay: Kevin Brodbin Cinematography: Rick Bota Music: Trevor Rabin U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
There's something very comfortable about reviewing a Steven Seagal film. Except for the odd aberration (UNDER SIEGE), all of his movies have been pretty bad. And there's the similarity aspect to consider -- Seagal's heroes are all interchangeable, as are most of the plot lines and action sequences. Regardless of whether he's masquerading as a ship's cook, a fire fighter, or an LA cop wearing love beads, Seagal is always Seagal, which is exactly what his fans want. In fact, the sameness of these films is such that, if I wanted to, I could take an old review, change the names, and have a reasonably accurate take on the new movie. Not that I'd ever really do that...
There is a certain, undeniable entertainment value in watching the exaggerated Seagal-kicks-butt scenes. However, after a few cracked skulls, broken bones, and near emasculations, that type of fun starts getting dull. It always amazes me how tough villains are in these movies. It takes at least a dozen vicious blows to the head before Seagal finally topples an enemy in THE GLIMMER MAN. Actually, my favorite scene doesn't involve a one-on-one confrontation. It occurs during a particularly nasty car crash. Once the vehicle has flipped over, but is still moving, Seagal (who isn't wearing a seatbelt) escapes through the smashed back window, then gets up and starts running away. It's a moment that Superman would envy.
Seagal plays Jack Cole, a homicide detective with a mysterious past and a penchant for wearing love beads (they're an unsuccessful reminder that violence is against his religion). As it turns out, he was once a special operative for the U.S. government. In his capacity as a trained assassin, he was known as "The Glimmer Man" -- as in, you see a glimmer of him, then you're dead. Now, Cole's past has come back to haunt him while he's tracking a serial killer. A wealthy businessman, Frank Deverell (Bob Gunton), has teamed with Cole's former boss, Mr. Smith (Brian Cox), and, together, these two are planning an illegal chemical weapons deal that will make them very rich. Meanwhile, Cole has to convince his new partner, Jim Campbell (Keenan Ivory Wayans), that he's not nuts when he starts talking about high level conspiracies involving the Russian mob.
The buddy angle is the only remotely new twist for a Seagal movie. For short stretches, Keenan Ivory Wayans is a useful antidote to Seagal's blandness (although I swear I saw the notoriously stone-faced star change expression once or twice during this film), but it never lasts very long. All of the intentional humor goes to Wayans, including at least one line that's very funny. (I won't mention it here -- if you're unfortunate enough to see THE GLIMMER MAN, I wouldn't want to ruin the best part.) There's also a gag regarding Campbell's crying during CASABLANCA that, while juvenile, is nevertheless amusing.
There are more pyrotechnics in THE GLIMMER MAN than in any non- UNDER SIEGE Seagal outing. Everything seems to be exploding. And, in addition to all the shootouts and martial arts battles, there's even time for a gadget or two, including a lethal credit card that functions like a Ginsu knife. (Anyone know where I can get one of those?) All- in-all, what we have here is "classic" Seagal. And that means, for anyone who isn't an admitted fan, an uninspired outing. As a result, perhaps this review is redundant. After all, how many different takes can there be on a Seagal movie unless (gasp!) it somehow manages to be good.
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman
