United States, 1996 U.S. Release Date: beginning 11/1/96 (limited) Running Length: 1:44 MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes) Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Gena Rowlands, Marisa Tomei, Gerard Depardieu, Moira Kelly, Jake Lloyd, David Thornton, David Sherrill Director: Nick Cassavetes Producer: Rene Cleitman Screenplay: Nick Cassavetes and Helen Caldwell Cinematography: Phedon Papamichael Music: Steven Hufsteter U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
Nick Cassavetes, the son of acclaimed international director John Cassavetes, makes his directorial debut with UNHOOK THE STARS, a pleasantly unsentimental character study of one woman who has difficulty letting go. Although Cassavetes may want independence from his father's name and memory, this film won't earn it, for, although the style bears only a passing resemblance to the late film maker's, Nick not only uses several members of John's crew (notably Phedon Papamichael), but has cast his mother, Gena Rowlands, in the lead role. In addition, the script has a heavy autobiographical tinge -- Cassavetes is using cinema to work out his ambiguous feelings towards his famous father.
For Mildred (Rowlands), a single mother (she was widowed many years ago), her last chick is about to fly the coup. Her oldest, a son (David Sherrill), has already left home. Now, her daughter, Annie (Moira Kelly), is on her way out. Their parting is less-than-amicable. Annie finds her mother to be a controlling and interfering influence, and wants to get away as soon as possible. Mildred watches her go sadly, wondering what happened to all the aspirations she harbored for her only female offspring. But Mildred isn't destined to be alone for long. Her new neighbor across the street, Monica Warren (Marisa Tomei), has thrown her husband (David Thornton) out following a particularly nasty quarrel. Now, she's alone with her young son, J.J. (Jake Lloyd), and doesn't have the money to pay a sitter when she goes to work. Mildred offers to help, gratis, and soon becomes J.J.'s surrogate mother.
Looking back on UNHOOK THE STARS, the first thing that strikes me is the script's openness and honesty. It doesn't try to trick and manipulate us with melodrama. Every action has a natural consequence -- nothing ever feels forced or scripted. When Monica's husband returns to town, wanting to see his son, there's no shouting match or violence. When Annie eventually comes home, there's no big, tearful reunion. And, when Mildred begins to realize that her time with J.J. is coming to a close, we're spared an emotional scene. UNHOOK THE STARS is consistently low-key, and, in the context of an intelligent script and strong acting, this represents a welcome change-of-pace from most American films.
Gena Rowlands is excellent, but that shouldn't come as a surprise. She becomes Mildred, subtly and effectively bringing the woman's every emotion to the surface. This is the kind of role that could easily be overacted, but Rowlands strikes the perfect balance between restraint and abandon. From the first scene, where she's delivering newspapers, to the last, where she turns her back on the past and strides purposely towards the future, Rowlands makes us care about Mildred.
Marisa Tomei, who has always had screen presence, gives the best performance of a relatively short career. Tomei makes Monica a swirling, contradictory font of pure emotion -- she's always nervous, agitated, elated, furious, or a combination of the above. Monica may not be the best-developed character, but Tomei invests her with such passion and energy that it's impossible not to see her as a lot more than the person on the pages of Cassavetes' screenplay.
It doesn't demand much of a stretch for Gerard Depardieu to play the likable French Canadian truck driver who becomes infatuated with Mildred. Depardieu is a pleasant addition to the cast (and got involved for the chance to work with Rowlands), but isn't a revelation. However, Moira Kelly is. The young actress, the best thing about the recent ENTERTAINING ANGELS, gives a powerhouse performance in limited screen exposure. Annie's pain and rage are palpable, going far beyond the norms of youthful rebellion, and Kelly realistically and effectively portrays them.
UNHOOK THE STARS is an engaging motion picture, mixing various flavors of comedy and drama into a satisfying whole. Admittedly, there are times when Cassavetes skims lightly over subject matter that is deserving of a fuller exploration, but the quality of the finished product allows us to overlook most of these incidents. UNHOOK THE STARS is a movie of many special, small moments, that, combined together, make for a shining cinematic experience.
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman
