Cast: Jack Nicholson, Stephen Dorff, Michael Caine, Judy Davis, Jennifer Lopez, Harold Perrineau Jr. Director: Bob Rafelson Producer: Jeremy Thomas Screenplay: Nick Villiers and Alison Cross Cinematography: Newton Thomas Sigel Music: Michael Lorenc U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
It's quite possible to argue that Jack Nicholson is among the ten best actors working today. Some of his performances, like those in CHINATOWN and THE SHINING (for example), are classics. So it's a little discouraging to note the alarming number of duds that Nicholson has recently participated in. The star's latest, BLOOD AND WINE, continues this unfortunate trend -- Nicholson is good, but the movie isn't.
Analyzed purely from a plot perspective, there's nothing terribly wrong with BLOOD AND WINE. It's an unremarkable noir thriller with a few twists that, despite being telegraphed too early, keep the story moving. Nicholson plays Alex Gates, the proprietor of a wine store. Alex is broke because he spends too much money lavishing gifts on his mistresses. His latest is the stunning Gabriela (Jennifer Lopez), a mini-skirted nanny for a rich family. Alex's solution to his financial insolvency is to steal a necklace from Gabriela's employers. To help him with the burglary, he has brought in Victor (Michael Caine), a lowlife British thief with a consumptive cough and a taste for the finer things. Things start to go wrong, however, when Gabriela becomes attracted to her lover's sullen stepson, Jason (Stephen Dorff), and Alex's wife (Judy Davis) finds out about his latest indiscretion.
As involved as that all sounds, there are two reasons why it doesn't make for interesting drama. In the first place, huge chunks of BLOOD AND WINE seem recycled. We have stolen jewels, an attractive woman torn between an older and younger man, and a thick layer of mistrust between criminals. BLOOD AND WINE has rare, isolated bursts of energy, but, for the most part, it comes down to fist fights, predictable betrayals, and car chases.
The second flaw is more detrimental, however. One key to a good thriller is fashioning interesting characters. They don't have to be likable -- RESERVOIR DOGS was populated by a bunch of no-good thugs and killers -- but they have to grab and hold the audience's attention. No one in BLOOD AND WINE is able to do that. This film contains a group of unappealing, banal personalities. The more we watch them, the more apathetic we become towards their plight.
Even Nicholson, who displays all of his usual charming, cynical mannerisms, can't redeem Alex -- there's not enough there for the actor to work with. Michael Caine has fun playing the amoral Victor, savoring one of his most interesting roles in some time. Victor's motto, which adequately describes his personality, is that "there's no such thing as honor among thieves. It's a myth." Judy Davis is underused in a scanty part as Alex's wife. Would that the same could be said of Stephen Dorff, whose sour, one-note performance becomes wearisome before the end of the first reel. Jennifer Lopez, soon to star in SELENA, adds sex appeal, but little else.
BLOOD AND WINE's director, Bob Rafelson, has previously made five movies with Nicholson, including 1970's memorable FIVE EASY PIECES. Their last collaboration prior to this one, 1992's MAN TROUBLE, was an unmitigated disaster, and BLOOD AND WINE isn't much of a step upwards. As an attempt to recapture past glory, this picture falls considerably short of the mark.
There are instances when fully-realized characters can save a tired plot, and times when a snappy, well-executed storyline can cover up for ill-developed personalities. Unfortunately, BLOOD AND WINE has neither. To give the film credit, it does possess a certain, dark style, but all the atmosphere in the world can't fill the holes left by the screenplay. BLOOD AND WINE develops a lot less than we expect from it, and leaves us wondering when Jack Nicholson will next tackle a role worthy of his reputation.
