Cast: Tim Allen, Sam Huntington, JoBeth Williams, Lolita Davidovich, Martin Short, David Ogden Stiers, Bob Dishy Director: John Pasquin Producer: Brian Reilly Screenplay: Bruce Evans and Raynold Gideon Cinematography: Tony Pierce-Roberts Music: Michael Convertino U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
Before I start lambasting this motion picture, let me recap my feelings about the French film upon which JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE is based. LITTLE INDIAN, BIG CITY (a.k.a., UN INDIEN DANS LA VILLE) was easily one of 1996's worst films -- a dull, lifeless attempt to cull laughs from dumb characters doing stupid things in contrived situations. Not for one moment was it cute, funny, or likable. So Disney, in their infinite wisdom, gobbled up the rights and decided to remake this loser by re- teaming Tool Man Tim Allen with THE SANTA CLAUSE's director, John Pasquin. The predictable result is a bad movie -- the kind of pointless tripe that the Mouse Company continues to foist upon us in the name of "family entertainment."
When I first heard that Allen was going to star in the LITTLE INDIAN reworking, my reaction was that it couldn't possibly be worse than the original. Ultimately, I was right, although just barely. JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE (what a stupid title -- why use "2" instead of "to"??) is pretty close to unwatchable, and it's certainly neither entertaining nor enjoyable. It is slightly more energetic than LITTLE INDIAN, and that's the only reason why I have given it a marginally better rating.
Allen plays Michael, a top-of-the-line Wall Street trader. He's engaged to an airheaded bimbo named Charlotte (Lolita Davidovich), but before they can tie the knot, he has to fly to Venezuela, find his current wife, Patricia (JoBeth Williams), and get a divorce (they've been separated for more than a dozen years). When he arrives in Patricia's little village, he learns that the thirteen year old white kid (Sam Huntington) in a loin cloth is actually his son. Furthermore, for reasons that are never made clear, Michael is obligated to bring the boy, Mimi, back to New York to experience life in the big city. CROCODILE DUNDEE this ain't.
Everything in JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE is hackneyed. There's never a whiff of innovation or a hint that the film makers might be interested in trying something different. And, like all "good" family films these days, there are several obligatory flatulence jokes. I think we're supposed to be touched by the growing bond between Michael and Mimi, and tickled by the slapstick-y antics of Allen and Martin Short (who plays one of Michael's cohorts). Neither of these aspects work. There's nothing emotionally solid or satisfying about the father/son relationship, and the duo's attempts at comedy seem more desperate than funny. The most amusing moment in JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE is entirely unintentional. During a scene when an incredibly fake spider is scurrying around the floor of Michael's boss' office, you can see the strings being used to manipulate it.
I for one am sick and tired of the unappealingly unoriginal fare that Disney releases on a constant basis. It's getting to the point where a visit to the dentist sounds like a reasonable alternative to sitting through another plot-by-numbers family film from the studio of plastic characters and happy endings. At least this time they've managed to do something of dubious note: turn one of 1996's worst motion pictures into one of 1997's. Congratulations, Disney. I hope Walt is turning in his grave.
