Cast: Frances O'Connor, Alice Garner, Matt Day, Matthew Dyktynski, Radha Mitchell, Kym Gyngell Director: Emma-Kate Croghan Producer: Stavros Andonis Efthymiou Screenplay: Helen Bandis, Yael Bergman, Emma-Kate Croghan Cinematography: Justin Brickle U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES is one of those movies that's so light and airy that's it's almost impossible to hate. Unfortunately, it's also terribly predictable, which makes it difficult to like. In addition, the film tries so hard to be hip and trendy that at times it's almost painful. Put that all together and what you get is a pleasant- but-dissatisfying motion picture that seems to be trying to copy Cameron Crowe's SINGLES, but ends up a lot closer to Ben Stiller's REALITY BITES.
LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES is the most recent in a veritable flood of comedies from Australia. At least this one is a little different in temperament and style. For one thing, the soundtrack isn't saturated with '70s songs (nothing by ABBA is even hinted at). Secondly, few of the actors will look familiar. In fact, for many of them, like for director/co-writer Emma-Kate Croghan, this is their first feature.
The film follows five college students' romantic and academic misadventures, concentrating far more on the former than the latter. The two characters with the most screen time are roommates Mia (Francis O'Connor) and Alice (Alice Garner). Mia is a lesbian and Alice is straight, but they're both having problems with their love lives. Fearful of commitment, Mia is pushing her lover, Danni (Radha Mitchell), away -- perhaps into the arms of another woman. Meanwhile, Alice is lusting after the seemingly-unattainable Ari (Matthew Dyktynski) while being admired from afar by Michael (Matt Day), a shy med student. There are also a couple of subplots going on, one involving a guy who is contemplating circumcision to please his girlfriend, and another centering on a film studies professor (Kym Gyngell) who is never without a donut in his hand or mouth.
LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES falls into the category of the singularly unambitious romantic comedy. Too many of the jokes fall flat, including brief jabs at the fanatical followers of directors Quentin Tarantino, Woody Allen, and Spike Lee. The film has a little fun equating the wisdom of philosophers like Nietzche with that pop icons like John Lennon, Paul McCartney, and Alfred Hitchcock. Perhaps the best line (although not necessarily the most appropriate) is a quote from the famous thriller director: "Always make the audience suffer as much as possible."
For the most part, the fresh-faced actors, especially Francis O'Connor and Alice Garner, give likable performances. Unfortunately, there isn't much romantic chemistry in evidence, although it's easy to envision all these characters as platonic friends. There's a simple playfulness about their relationships that's never effectively transformed into heat, even though we have a pretty good idea from the beginning who's going to be paired up with whom.
The best part of LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES has nothing to do with romance or relationships. It focuses on Mia's desperate attempt to change classes on the final day of the add/drop period. One bureaucratic mine after another lines her path: unpaid library fines, uncooperative professors, and a computer hacker who demands payment for services rendered. This sequence is about the only spontaneous-seeming aspect of the film; the rest of LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES is at least a notch below it.
I suppose Croghan thought she was bringing something new to the screen with LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES, although I can't imagine what. Admittedly, this is the first Generation X comedy that I can recall being photographed through an amber filter, but I don't think that's what the director had in mind for her hallmark achievement. Unfortunately, that's one of the most memorable aspects of this unremarkable film. LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES isn't funny enough, romantic enough, or offbeat enough to distinguish itself from the many films it's in direct competition with.
