For about five minutes (and I'm being generous with this figure), THE 6TH MAN is marginally funny. For the other one-hundred plus minutes, it's an unimaginative waste of time. This film, directed by Randall Miller (HOUSEGUEST) and written on a kindergarten level by Christopher Reed and Cynthia Carle, develops a dubious premise in the most pedestrian manner possible. Even fans of formula-driven sports movies will be bored by this entry -- not only is the outcome never in doubt (which is usually a given in this genre), but the road to the big victory isn't especially fun.
THE 6TH MAN has obviously been released at this time of the year to capitalize on "March Madness" -- those few weeks during late winter/early spring when the NCAA basketball championship is decided. However, while audiences may be in the mood for a movie about the sport, they're likely searching for something more creative or energetic. THE 6TH MAN pales in comparison to the least competitive NCAA game.
Antoine (Kadeem Hardison) and Kenny Tyler (Marlon Wayans) are star basketball players for the Washington Huskies. Their inspired play has led the team to its best record in years. However, all of the playoff- bound optimism evaporates in a flash of tragedy when Antoine collapses during a game then dies on the way to the hospital. The Huskies' fortunes tumble and Kenny, unable to take over his brother's role as leader, cries out that he can't do it alone. Unexpectedly, his plea invokes supernatural help, as Antoine's spirit returns from beyond the grave to ensure that his former teammates make it all the way to the NCAA Final Four. Suddenly, the Huskies are the beneficiaries of ghostly tip-ins, mid-air ball deflections, and other amazing examples of "good luck."
Most of THE 6TH MAN's comedy is the result of Marlon Wayans' madcap physical antics. Although Kenny can see Antoine, he's invisible to everyone else, so, on those occasions when the two brothers interact (such as when Antoine has Kenny in a headlock), all anyone else sees is Kenny in a position that would make a contortionist envious. Some of these sequences are worth a hearty laugh or two, but there aren't nearly enough of them to justify the bloated one-hundred eight minute running length. A script this thin would have difficulty holding an audience's attention for half that time.
All attempts at drama end in failure. This includes Kenny's feeble and unconvincing struggle to cope with his brother's loss, his romance with a female reporter (Michael Michele) who is experiencing a crisis of conscience, and the team's sudden desire at the end to win without Antoine's help. THE 6TH MAN is by-the-book screenwriting at its most uninspired. And Randall Miller's direction doesn't do anything to liven things up. In fact, despite the presence of a number of real college coaches, he manages to make the staged basketball games look just that - - staged.
Marlon Wayans is the only one involved in this project who exhibits any talent whatsoever, and his effectiveness is destroyed by bad writing. The rest of the cast -- Kadeem Hardison, Michael Michele, David Paymer (as the Huskies' coach), and Kevin Dunn (as a sports reporter) -- vary from mediocre to listless. The most painful aspect of all, however, is being forced to watch the always-hyper Dick Vitale attempt to turn in an acting performance. Vitale's endeavors to act spontaneous are laughably absurd -- a term that could describe this film as a whole. THE 6TH MAN should be called for a very apparent foul.
