Italy/France, 1996 Running Length: 1:20 MPAA Classification: No MPAA /97 & 5/11/97
Cast: Nanni Moretti, Valeria Bruni Tedeschi, Valeria Milillo, Roberto de Francesco, Marina Confalone Director: Mimmo Calopresti Producers: Nanni Moretti, Angelo Barbagallo Screenplay: Heidrun Schleef, Francesco Bruni, Mimmo Calopresti Cinematography: Alessandro Pesci In Italian with subtitles
One day, a man sees a woman. Something about her strikes him as familiar and he begins to follow her. All day, he dogs her steps -- to her cafeteria at work, on the bus going home, and finally, along the street leading to the prison from which she is set free by day to participate in a work release program. The man, a university professor named Alberto Sajevo, returns home. All evening, he thinks of the woman, and the next day he sets out to meet her. Their eyes lock and they have a polite conversation, but something isn't right. Neither of them offers their real name to the other -- they go by assumed identities. There's a dynamic between these two that we don't understand -- perhaps they don't, either. Where are things going? Why is Alberto following her? And what are his intentions?
So begins director Mimmo Calopresti's gripping psychological thriller, THE SECOND TIME. I won't say any more about the plot, because, beyond the setup, there are layers of Hitchcockian surprises to be revealed. If there's one obvious flaw to the film, it's that the running time is a little too short. The situation is so fascinating and the characters are so real that we find ourselves wanting the story to keep going.
THE SECOND TIME isn't just about plot twists and surprises, however. There is a deep psychological underpinning to the proceedings which asks questions about the nature of forgiveness and whether issues we fight for today will have any meaning for us in ten years' time. It's also worth noting that some events, whether intentional or unintentional, can bind strangers together forever. In bringing this point to the fore, THE SECOND TIME is not unlike another Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema entry, THE EIGHTEENTH.
THE SECOND TIME is one of those stories where there's no real beginning or end. The characters' lives have been going on for a long time before we first meet them, and they'll continue after the end credits have rolled. There are no obligatory flashbacks to show us important past events and no epilogue to hint at what the future might hold. The film doesn't have much of a sense of closure, but, when it's all over, we feel that we're "up to speed" and have witnessed an important event.
The acting is excellent. Sajevo is played by the multi-talented Nanni Moretti (best known in the United States for his film CARO DIARIO). Valeria Bruni Tedeschi (NENETTE AND BONI) is Lisa Venturi, the woman whom Alberto trails. The scenes between these two are electric, and the mix of emotions -- anger, fear, confusion, resentment, hatred, and guilt -- is explosive. Both parts require great range, and the performers are up to the challenge.
Much of the credit for the film's success has to go to co- writer/director Mimmo Calopresti, who knows exactly where he wants the narrative to go, and never loses control of it. If the pacing of the second half is a little uneven, that can be attributed to the escalation in tension resulting from confrontations. The first half, however, is perfectly paced. We are brought into the situation gradually, at first mildly intrigued by the characters, then burning with curiosity. The revelation, when it occurs, is a shock, but one that makes sense when examined in retrospect. Few movies today are put together this expertly. Not only does THE SECOND TIME address several important issues, but it does so within a framework designed to keep viewers on the edge of their seats.
