Ever since New Line Cinema's highly profitable, early 1996 release of RUMBLE IN THE BRONX, New Line and Dimension/Miramax have been busily acquiring the rights to older Jackie Chan motion pictures. They recognize that Chan's American fan base is such that even a moderately successful first weekend box office can turn a profit. As a result, in the space of a year, we have seen SUPERCOP (1993), FIRST STRIKE (1995), and now the older OPERATION CONDOR (1991).
OPERATION CONDOR, originally released in Hong Kong as ARMOR OF GOD II, is something of an odd choice to release, since all die hard Chan fans are likely already familiar with it (it's available on video). Dimension has invested a little money for the creation of a newly dubbed audio soundtrack (complete with music by Miramax regular Stephen Endelman), but, other than that, the viewing experience isn't much different. All indications are that the distributor wanted to put out a Jackie Chan movie this summer, and settled upon something that was cheap and readily available.
As far as plot goes, this film, like many of the action superstar's efforts, is decidedly silly and disjointed, often bordering on incoherent. Any Chan storyline is, after all, just a flimsy excuse to permit the leading man to perform a number of amazing stunts, engage in astonishing martial arts fights, and present a series of hilarious comedy bits. All of those elements are present here, but the connecting material is exceptionally feeble, to the extent that the patches between action sequences are not just filler, but boring filler. Of the four recent U.S. Chan releases, OPERATION CONDOR is the weakest, although it still offers a certain degree of episodic entertainment value.
The film, which Chan co-wrote and directed, plays like a merger of an Indiana Jones outing and a James Bond adventure, and makes far less sense than any entry into either series. Chan plays a soldier of fortune named Jackie, and, in the company of an attractive female historian (Carol Cheng) and a feisty, platinum blond German woman (Eva Cobo deGarcia), he goes to North Africa on a treasure hunt. Equipped with a map and a key, he crosses the Sahara desert in search of a hidden stash of Nazi gold. In pursuit are all sorts of bad guys, including a pair of bumbling Arab terrorists who keep turning up like bad pennies.
OPERATION CONDOR is light on spectacular action sequences and heavy on fights and comedy. There are only two hardware-intensive scenes: a chase that has six cars in pursuit of motorcycle-riding Chan and a brawl in a wind tunnel. There are numerous hand-to-hand combat incidents, all of which are meticulously choreographed (things still go wrong, as shown in the end-credit outtakes that are a hallmark of Chan's films). OPERATION CONDOR also features a high humor quotient, with loads of quick gags and longer physical comedy setups, that is enhanced by the cheesy dubbing.
From an acting standpoint, Chan is the only one worth paying any attention to. As always, he's a leaping, whirling dervish of madcap energy and exuberance. His ability to make any action sequence both funny and exciting is a testament to his talent. He's Keaton, Chaplin, and Van Damme all rolled into one. Other players in OPERATION CONDOR fill their roles effectively, but no one comes close to accomplishing what Michelle Khan did in SUPERCOP -- encroach upon Chan's place in the spotlight.
It's debatable whether each new (or, in this case, old) Jackie Chan movie needs a unique review. Give or take a few minor variations, Chan films are essentially the same, which is what the fans want. Fortunately, Chan is so enjoyable that, even though the plots and characters vary from recycled to irrelevant, mediocre films like OPERATION CONDOR still feature bursts of undeniable entertainment.
Copyright 1997 James Berardinelli
"A film is a petrified fountain of thought." - Jean Cocteau
