Two years ago, writer Paul Rudnick brought his play JEFFREY to the screen. The result was one of the year's most hilarious motion pictures. This gay romantic comedy was sly, irreverent, and even a little sentimental, but, because the lead character (played by WINGS star Steven Weber) was a homosexual, mainstream audiences did not embrace the movie. Not even the presence of STAR TREK's Captain Picard, Patrick Stewart, could pack in the heterosexual crowds. So, while JEFFREY was regarded as a success within the gay community, it was quickly forgotten about outside.
Now, in 1997, Rudnick has written another gay-themed comedy. This one offers bigger laughs, more subversive humor, and a better-known cast. It is surely one of the year's best pure comedies, but it remains to be seen whether Kevin Kline, Matt Dillon, Joan Cusack, and Tom Selleck have enough star power to draw mixed crowds to a film whose subject has traditionally made many straight males uncomfortable. Those who stay away from IN AND OUT because it addresses homosexual issues (albeit in a light fashion) are missing an intelligent, funny motion picture.
From the very first scene, you know that IN AND OUT has struck a rich satirical vein. The movie opens in Greenleaf, Indiana, a conservative, family values-oriented town in middle America that seems to be stuck in the fifties. Director Frank Oz has photographed Greenleaf as a place with a gauzy, fairy tale-like quality that, along with some very pointed dialogue, gently pokes fun at cherished, LEAVE IT TO BEAVER impressions of the "ideal" community. Unlike David Lynch, who has repeatedly attacked this image in his films, Oz and Rudnick are content to have a little affectionate fun with it (much like Christopher Guest did in WAITING FOR GUFFMAN).
We are introduced to Howard Brackett (Kevin Kline), one of the local high school's most popular teachers. Day-in and day-out, Howard attempts to stir the minds of his young charges to embrace Shakespeare and other forms of English literature. And, while the kids appreciate Howard's teaching methods, they're more interested in his recollections of Cameron Drake (Matt Dillon), a pupil from several years ago who has gone on to become a teen heartthrob and the odds-on favorite to win this year's Best Actor Oscar. Howard is less interested in whether Cameron wins, however, than he is in planning his upcoming wedding to a fellow teacher, Emily Montgomery (Joan Cusack), with whom he has been engaged for three years. No one is more excited about the wedding than Howard's mother (Debbie Reynolds), who sees the ceremony as the culmination of a lifelong dream.
Then comes the bombshell. During his internationally-televised acceptance speech for the Academy Award, Cameron goes out of his way to thank "Howard Brackett," adding, rather unexpectedly, that "He's a gay teacher." Everyone, including Howard, is shocked by the statement. The next day, reporters converge on Greenleaf, looking for a story. One of them, Peter Malloy (Tom Selleck), manages to confront Howard alone, and what he reveals causes the confused teacher to question his own sexuality.
IN AND OUT has a thinking person's script, and, as such, works on several levels. It can be seen as a light comedy, a biting satire, and/or a morality play that uses humor to examine society's approach to sexual identities. IN AND OUT definitely isn't a pointless comedy of the DUMB AND DUMBER variety -- it deals with issues in a shrewd manner, using a creative and well-written script to camouflage with wit any preaching. Gay roles and stereotypes aren't the only subject tackled by IN AND OUT. The film also takes a number of pointed shots at various aspects of pop culture (Hollywood, the Oscars, television tabloid shows, supermodels, etc.). The ending includes a wonderful spoof of the climax of SPARTACUS. And the film is peppered with top-notch one-liners, the best of which come during the mock Oscar telecast where Cameron wins his statue.
The actors all do fine jobs. Kevin Kline, who is no stranger to comedy following a pair of John Cleese movies (A FISH CALLED WANDA and FIERCE CREATURES) and DAVE, knows just how to play Howard to keep us laughing yet gain our sympathy. Tom Selleck gives one of his best big- screen performances by playing against type. Joan Cusack is her usual delightful, ditzy self, and Debbie Reynolds picks up here where she left off in MOTHER. The rest of the cast, which includes Matt Dillon, Wilford Brimley, and model Shalom Harlow, is equally solid.
With IN AND OUT, Rudnick, who is openly gay, has written one of 1997's smartest scripts. This is a rare, "feel good" motion picture that doesn't insult our intelligence while making its play for our emotions. Regardless of your opinion of the gay community, IN AND OUT is more than worth an evening's admission -- provided, of course, that you like to laugh.
Copyright 1997 James Berardinelli
"A film is a petrified fountain of thought." - Jean Cocteau
