Cast: Greg Kinnear, Lauren Holly, Joan Cusack, Jay Thomas, Jill Hennessy, Christopher McDonald, France Nuyen Director: Keith Samples Producers: Tony Amatullo, David Kirkpatrick Screenplay: Kevin Meyer and Keith Samples Cinematography: Richard Bowen Music: William Ross U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
Can infertility be funny? I can think of a few scenarios that might cause laughter. Unfortunately, none of these are present in Keith Samples' directorial debut, A SMILE LIKE YOURS, which vacillates uncertainly between unfunny farce and ineffectual melodrama. The co- writer/director obviously wants this to be an uplifting, feel good experience, but, inexplicably, he injects so much pathos into the situation (a couple who desperately want, but can't produce, a child) that parts of A SMILE LIKE YOURS are downers.
I believe there's some kind of hidden rule that any film featuring infertility must have the obligatory "man going to fill the cup with semen" scene. Film makers always seem to think this is hilarious; it's too bad the audience has seen it so many times that it has long since lost whatever residual humor it once possessed. Worse still, not only is this scene in the movie, but it's repeated time after time after time.
The victim who has to fill all those cups is Danny Robertson (Greg Kinnear), a faithful and loving husband who is trying to discover why he and his wife, Jennifer (Lauren Holly), can't have a child. It's not for lack of trying: they have sex at every opportunity, often in very public places (such as an elevator at the construction site where Danny works). Alas, Danny's sperm are weak swimmers, and they can't reach Jennifer's eggs. So the couple is faced with a dilemma: remain childless or visit a fertility clinic. Despite the expense of the latter option, the Robertsons choose it, but their continuous, unsuccessful attempts to generate an offspring put a strain on their marriage. That strain is exacerbated when a sexy architect (Jill Hennessy) makes a play for Danny.
When paired together in SABRINA, Greg Kinnear and Lauren Holly didn't exactly generate sparks. Then again, they were just supporting characters -- the main chemistry was left to Harrison Ford and Julia Ormand. Here, Kinnear and Holly are back together again, and, unfortunately, the heat still isn't there. With the exception of a few calculated "cute" moments, these two comprise one of the least interesting couples of the year. Holly's range is severely limited and Kinnear, while gradually developing into a polished performer, still has trouble with the more serious moments.
The supporting players are uniformly more interesting than the leads. Jay Thomas, who's always good for a laugh or two, is Danny's best friend. Joan Cusack is a little less ditzy than usual as Jennifer's perfume-selling business partner. Jill Hennessy is suitably vampish as the mouthwatering temptation placed in Danny's path. And there's an easily-recognizable "special guest star" who makes an uncredited appearance near the end.
A SMILE LIKE YOURS tries to be funny, charming, and delightful. Except on rare occasions, it is none of the three. From time-to-time, one of the film's farcical elements has satirical value (like the low- budget flight from hell), and may even generate a laugh or two. And there are a few sly, witty one-liners. In general, however, A SMILE LIKE YOURS comes across as lifeless and bland. In fact, it's so forgettable that, in a couple of months, I'll probably have to refer to this review to remember what it was about.
Copyright 1997 James Berardinelli
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life and takes from it..."
- Jean-Luc Godard
