United States, 1997 U.S. Release Date: beginning 7/97 (limited) Running Length: 1:28 MPAA Classification: R (Sex, nudity, profanity, violence) Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Douglas Spain, Efrain Figueroa, Kandeyce Jorden, Martha Velez, Lysa Flores, Annette Murphy, Vincent Chandler Director: Miguel Arteta Producer: Matthew Greenfield Screenplay: Miguel Arteta based on story by Arteta and Matthew Greenfield Cinematography: Chuy Chavez Music: Lysa Flores U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
STAR MAPS contains a number of potentially-rich themes: the ease with which the American dream can turn into the American nightmare, the difficulty experienced by immigrants assimilating into the American culture, and the pain and self-loathing created by living as a member of a dysfunctional family. Unfortunately, perhaps because first time writer/director Miguel Arteta is attempting to tackle too many issues, or because he doesn't have a good feel for anything below the surface, much of this movie comes across as shallow and melodramatic. It also doesn't help that the lead actor, Douglas Spain, appears to have been chosen more because he possesses a particular "look" than for his ability to act. Spain's stiff and unconvincing performance does little to draw us into his character's life and bring us face-to-face with his many dilemmas.
While I can't think of another film that covers all of the ground traversed by STAR MAPS, the film frequently ventures into territory that was examined more effectively by such diverse offerings as MY FAMILY, ONCE WERE WARRIORS, and JOHNS. As a result, watching STAR MAPS is likely to generate a sense of deja vu. Someone once said that all movies are basically copies of others, and, while it doesn't always seem that way, in this case it does.
The film takes its title from the profession chosen by the protagonist, a teenager named Carlos (Spain), who has made the bus trip from Mexico to Los Angeles in pursuit of his dream to become a star (the next Antonio Banderas). Carlos lives with his family -- brother, Juancita (Vincent Chandler); sister, Maria (Lysa Flores); mother, Teresa (Martha Velez); and father, Pepe (Efrain Figueroa) -- and works on the streets of Hollywood, selling "Star Maps" (a cover for prostitution). His pimp is his father, who does everything he can to crush Carlos' dream, while continually asserting that he loves his son. Pepe lives a life of lies, and it's rare that he tells anyone the truth -- not his wife, his children, or his mistress, Letti (Annette Murphy), whom he keeps on a string with promises of an eventual marriage.
One day, Carlos finally gets a big break. An actress (Kandeyce Jorden) who purchased his services is smitten and wants to make him her regular toy boy. In return for his favors, she promises him a speaking part in her regular television series, CARMEL COUNTY, which is produced by her husband. Pepe isn't pleased by this turn of events, and, worrying that he might lose his son to the screen, he sets out to sabotage the arrangement. Meanwhile, the situation at Pepe's home grows increasingly less stable.
There's enough material in STAR MAPS to keep a soap opera going for several weeks, if not months. The characters are all drawn broadly, and the direction lacks subtlety (the moment we see a bottle of pills being hidden behind some cans, we know it's going to be important later in the film). There are a pair of interesting personalities here -- Carlos' sister, Maria, and Pepe's mistress, Letti -- but neither is accorded enough screen time to do more than briefly arrest our attention.
For the most part, the acting is amateurish, which is disappointing, although not surprising, considering the film's low budget. This is probably a case of a director enlisting the help of friends and associates, not all of whom display a great deal of talent (only Martha Velez has any significant feature credits to her name). But, while the movie lacks strong performances, its greatest weakness is the writing. In trying to original, Arteta inserts several offbeat comic sequences (Carlos accepting an Oscar after an award-winning performance in bed, a bizarre dinner conversation) that, while funny as stand-alone pieces, clash violently with the overriding tone. The ending is also problematic. While it's supposed to be ambiguous, it's actually frustrating, leaving all sorts of loose ends dangling.
Despite all of its flaws, however, STAR MAPS still has a soap opera-type appeal. It's not the kind of movie many people will walk out on, because, even considering its lack of depth, it retains the ability to hook a viewer into wondering what happens next. There's enough sex, violence, and boiling-point emotion to capture the attention of even the most easily-distracted viewer. Ultimately, however, STAR MAPS doesn't amount to much more than several ideas that are never effectively translated into anything more potent than sudsy drivel.
Copyright 1997 James Berardinelli
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life and takes from it..."
- Jean-Luc Godard
