BEAUTY AND THE BEAST: THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS
A Film Review by James Berardinelli
United States, 1997 U.S. Release Date: 11/11/97 (direct-to-video) Running Length: 1:12 MPAA Classification: n/a Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.33:1
Featuring the voices of: Paige O'Hara, Robby Benson, Jerry Orbach, David Ogden Stiers, Angela Lansbury, Tim Curry, Bernadette Peters, Paul Reubens Director: Andy Knight Screenplay: Flip Koler & Cindy Marcus and Bill Motz & Bob Roth Music: Rachel Portman Lyrics: Don Black U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
Sequels have always been a popular means of cinematic entertainment, even back in the days of the old cliffhanger serials. After all, by using previously-established characters, there's a built- in audience. In recent years, it's almost an axiom that any film grossing $100 million will have a continuation, no matter how ludicrous the premise. Walt Disney Pictures claims to have a policy against theatrical follow-ups to their "animated classics" (although this doesn't explain 1990's THE RESCUERS DOWN UNDER), but that policy doesn't extend beyond the silver screen THE LITTLE MERMAID was converted into a Saturday morning TV show. ALADDIN already has two direct-to-video sequels (THE RETURN OF JAFAR and ALADDIN AND THE KING OF THIEVES). Both THE LION KING and POCAHONTAS have new videotape adventures on the way. And, with the heavily-marketed release of BEAUTY AND THE BEAST: THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS, one of the family-friendly company's most-beloved features now has a new chapter.
The familiarity inherent in a sequel is a double-edged sword. On the positive side, it allows us to visit old friends. Less time can be spent establishing the characters, since we already know them, so it's possible to get into the heart of the story more quickly. On the other hand, comparisons are inevitable, and, with a genuine classic of BEAUTY AND THE BEAST's stature, they're not likely to be favorable. No matter how much effort was put into the production of THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS, there's no way it could live up to the standards established by its predecessor.
As a direct-to-video effort, THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS is more than respectable. It's far ahead of the two ALADDIN tapes, and is arguably better than Disney's latest animated theatrical feature, HERCULES. It goes without saying that we're not getting something of comparable quality to the original BEAUTY AND THE BEAST -- the time, effort, and budget are considerably less, and it shows in many ways. Surprisingly, the animation is one area that suffers only a minor degradation. For the most part, it's crisp, clean, and smooth. The computer generated sequences featuring the new villain, Forte the pipe organ, are impressive. I was frankly impressed by how good THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS looks, especially considering the unevenness of the ALADDIN sequels.
The biggest step down is in the writing. THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS is clearly aimed at a young audience, with little consideration for the adults who may be watching. The script isn't stupid or insulting, but it lacks the polish and maturity of BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. The story, a "mid-quel" (as opposed to a prequel or sequel), occurs during a time period partway through the original film, presenting a "missing" chapter from the long interval when Belle (voice of Paige O'Hara) and the Beast (Robby Benson) are growing more fond of each other. (Bookend THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS with the scenes from BEAUTY AND THE BEAST where the Beast saves Belle from the wolves and where he shows her the library.) The evil Forte (Tim Curry), the Beast's talking pipe organ and former court composer, is jealous of his master's attachment to Belle, and, along with his unwilling henchman, Fife (Paul Reubens), plots to destroy their relationship. Meanwhile, Belle, with the aid of her friends Lumiere (Jerry Orbach), Cogsworth (David Ogden Stiers), Mrs. Potts (Angela Lansbury), and the ornament Angelique (Bernadette Peters), plans to bring Christmas back to the gloomy castle, even though the Beast has strictly forbidden its celebration.
The best parts of THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS are those that concentrate on developing the relationship between Belle and the Beast. There's a scene where she tries to teach him to skate, and another where they reconcile after a misunderstanding. Unfortunately, the film makers have added a lot of "adventure" to the mix, and, while this aspect of the movie may be fine for younger viewers, more sophisticated viewers will find it routine. As a villain, Forte is neither sinister nor frightening (his inability to move is a distinct flaw), although he does get to utter a few delicious lines. There are five new songs from the team of Rachel Portman and Don Black (who wrote the lyrics to "Diamonds are Forever"), all of which are more obligatory than inspired. They're not bad, but they don't add a lot to the proceedings.
The entire principal vocal cast is back, and they're all in fine form. Joining them are Tim Curry as Forte, Paul Reubens as the flute- like Fife, and Bernadette Peters as the angelic Angelique. Combining well-known voices with familiar animated faces makes watching THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS a comfortable, genial experience. It's not a classic, and the videotape won't get the same kind of play afforded to BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, but, if only for the chance to spend 70 minutes with old friends, THE ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS is a welcome release.
Copyright 1997 James Berardinelli
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."
- Alfred Hitchcock
