MODERNS, THE (director: Alan Rudolph; cast: Keith Carradine (Nick Hart), Linda Fiorentino (Rachel Stone), John Lone (Bertram Stone), Wally Shawn (Oiseau), Genevi=E8ve Bujold (Libby Valentin),Geraldine Chaplin (Nathalie de Ville),Kevin J. O'Connor (Ernest Hemingway), Ali Giron (Alice B. Toklas),Elsa Raven (Gertrude Stein),1988)
Paris as it was in 1926 for "The Lost Generation" of Americans: Hemingway, Gertrude Stein, Alice B.Toklas, and all the other artists and would be artists seeking to make their name known on foreign soil. Rudolph takes a rather cynical and tongue-in-cheek view of that art scene, capturing the mood and the atmosphere of that period, shooting this highly entertaining and for him, accessible film, in a dazzling display of color, representative of the art produced at that time by Picasso, Cezanne, Matisse and Modigliani. This was actually the first feature film he had in mind, but had to wait to do it until he got backers. His love and understanding of this time period shows up very well, as a result, he creates his best film to date.
The plot of the film concerns love, heartbreak, money problems, the meaning of art, alcoholism and finding one's identity. Nick Hart (Carradine) is the cartoonist for the Chicago Tribune, living in a garret, frequenting the Parisian expatriate cafes, trying to sell the paintings he works on with all his artistic skills, and earning extra money by forging the paintings of the masters. Oiseau (Shawn) is his friend and colleague on the paper, who writes a gossip column.
When Nick sees the beautiful wife he never divorced, Rachel (Linda), in a Paris bar, married to the ruthless and crass business man (manufacturer of condoms) and private art collector, Bertram (Lone), he tries to win her back. She is dissipated, unhappy with the direction of her life, becoming an alcoholic, and ashamed that she is married to a very cruel and despicable man.
Libby (Bujold) is a small-time art dealer who tries unsuccessfully to sell Nick's paintings. Nathalie de Ville (Chaplin) is the insincere art collector wife of a husband that she cheats on; while also, hiring Nick to forge three of her philandering husband's collection of masters for the nefarious purpose of getting even with him. The Parisian scene is topped off by an emotionally sentimental Hemingway (O'Connor), showing up at all the right parties, sitting at the right cafes, drinking to excess and plying his craft, while thinking aloud, as his philosphy comes off as just so much drivel, with him appearing shallow and hopelessly American despite his presence in Paris at precisely the right time for an American to be there. Gertrude Stein (Elsa) and her friend Alice (Ali), come off as snobs, in love with their own sense of self-importance.
Though the story might falter at times, with unneeded boxing matches and stereotyped tourists providing unneeded insights into the Parisian scene, what never faltered was how well this film looked and how engagingly it caught the ironies of that period.
REVIEWED ON 3/1/99
=A9 all rights reserved Dennis Schwartz
