LEAGUE OF GENTLEMEN, THE (director: Basil Dearden; screenwriter: John Boland (novel)/Bryan Forbes; cinematographer: Arthur Ibbetson; editor: John D. Guthridge; cast: Jack Hawkins (John George Norman Hyde (Lt. Col.)), Nigel Patrick (Peter Graham Race (Transport Major)), Roger Livesey ('Padre' Mycroft (Quartermaster Capt.)), Richard Attenborough (Edward Lexy (Radio Lt.)), Bryan Forbes (Martin Porthill (Capt.)), Kieron Moore (Stevens (Capt.)), Robert Coote (Bunny Warren), Terence Alexander (Rupert Rutland-Smith (Major)), Norman Bird (Frank Weaver (Explosives Capt.)), 1959-UK)
Reviewed by Dennis Schwartz
The League of Gentlemen is a fine example of old-fashioned English humor: droll and civil. Jack Hawkins is the brusque, control-freak, ex-British army colonel during WW11 who has read the American novel The Golden Fleece, which gives him the bright idea that he can rob a bank with some ex-military personnel as experts. He is embittered that he was forced out of the service after twenty-five years. He thereby plans this spiteful caper, as he carefully chooses a seven-man team of similarly discontented military men, but unlike him, those with checkered criminal pasts in the service who were cashiered out. He gets them to a meeting where he treats them to an expensive lunch and tells them his plans to rob a bank for a million dollars; they are then told that they will all have equal shares.
The film's strong suit is watching the precision planning that goes into the operation as it unfolds and how all these older blokes exhibit their odd personalties to mesh into a team-operation replete with proper military decorum. Because of their untenable civilian situations, all seven show why it is likely they would participate in this operation.
Nigel Patrick is the ex-major, always a schemer, involved in black market activities in Berlin but also proud to be known as a survivor of Dunkirk. He has fallen on hard times and has lost all his money in a card game. He takes over as second-in-command for this caper. Roger Livesey got bounced from the service for indecent exposure and has now made a career of disguising himself as a religious man, his latest being as a padre. Richard Attenborough is an expert radio operator who now rigs slot machines for the casino owners. He was kicked out of the military because he sold secrets to the Russians for the money not because he shared their ideals. Norman Bird is an explosive expert who got drunk on his watch and four men under him died because of his negligence in a bomb-disposal operation. He is unhappily shown as a henpecked husband in civilian life. Kieron Moore is an ex-fascist who joined the army but was the odd man out in a criminal investigation and is having money problems currently working as a masseur. Bryan Forbes lives off middle-aged women and is finding his current life unbearably confusing. Terence Alexander is a pianist who has not fared well in peacetime England.
It is determined by Hawkins that they need military supplies for their caper, so they impersonate high-ranking army officers and pull a surprise inspection on an army base, while some of them cut the radio wires and show up to do repairs but instead steal gas masks and other supplies they need for their job. They cleverly speak with Irish accents so that the IRA gets blamed.
The methodical job is pulled off with success, as in the midst of tear gas they explode the criminals don their gas masks and walk off with the loot. As they meet in Hawkins' house to divide the loot and celebrate their good fortunes, a surprise ending takes place.
A very watchable caper movie, but with a decided British edge to it which might inhibit some American viewers from enjoying it as much. The lovable rogue characters give the film a spirited uplift, with Hawkins, Patrick, Livesey, and Attenborough being particularly good in their portrayals. What the film lacks is any kind of intensity, it's all comedy and manners.
REVIEWED ON 5/19/2000
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
© ALL RIGHTS RESERVED DENNIS SCHWARTZ
