PARTY (director/writer: Manoel de Oliveira; screenwriter: Agustina Bessa-Luis; cinematographer: Renato Berta; editor: Valerie Loiseleux; cast: Michel Piccoli (Michel), Irene Papas (Irene), Leonor Silveira (Leonor), Rogerio Samora (Rogerio); Runtime: 95; Gemini Films / Madragoa Filmes; 1996-Portugal / France)
Reviewed by Dennis Schwartz
Portuguese filmmaker Manoel de Oliveira takes a sarcastic look at two couples who are international jet-setters, he does this while examining an obsessive flirtation between an aging Lothario and a beautiful, much younger, married woman.
On St. Miguel island of the Azores, the wealthy Rogério and Leonor celebrate their ten years of marriage with a garden party in their splendid villa. They invite a large group of people over, most are strangers to Rogério as they were invited by his wife. The hosts choose to sit with Michel and Irene. Michel's a witty, impertinent seducer of women, who thrives on his wicked reputation, while she's an aging Greek actress, once famous for playing Electra, who is now Michel's lover.
An unlikely attraction occurs between the very tall and attractive twentysomething Leonor and the short, portly, much older middle-aged Michel, which prompts them to get away from the others and head for a view of the sea on the mountainous rocks that is out of sight from the party. Here, Michel tells her of the maddening love he has for her. She is enthralled by his love, but all we are able to determine, is that they talk about it and don't act on it. Meanwhile, at the party, Irene and Rogério chatter away, confessing what love means to them, which all sounded rather superficial and theatrical. When Michel returns with Leonor, the jealous husband tells Michel to leave his house, just as a strong wind ends the outdoor party.
Five years later, upon Leonor's insistence, they get together for a dinner in the museum-like house of Rogério. The couple are shown to be avid collectors who like to pretend they care about culture but really have these objects only to impress others. Bon mots fly off all their lips, as they converse about the differences between men and women, what is happiness, and offer their opinion about anything under the sun. It is raining hard and Irene calls the rain insiduous, as Michel openly says he loves Leonor and she tells him she thought about him every day for the last five years. They disappear from the room, leaving Rogério and Irene time to chat, with him expressing disillusionment with his wife for ridiculing him in this way, while Irene says, "Only in despair do I find happiness." She explains the absurdity of the world by saying, "The world belongs to lunatics like Hitler and Mussolini -- there're the ones who are most noticeable."
There's a surprise ending, which nicely resolves this little love conundrum. The clues to the outcome are hinted at from a quote Rogério made earlier on, when talking about his wife to Irene, "There's virginity in the enigma of life." The film appeals to the intellect to answer its questions about love, but fails to be appealing emotionally. It was just too chatty and the characters always seemed to be symbols, too unapproachable to be considered as real people. But I'm a big fan of Michel Piccoli and Irene Papas, and I found their performances to be very stimulating--which is reason enough to see this art house film.
REVIEWED ON 12/19/2000
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
© ALL RIGHTS RESERVED DENNIS SCHWARTZ
