TRICK is one of those rare gay romantic comedies that passes the "straight test." As films with gay themes became more prevalent in recent years, they began to blur together. Filmmakers appeared to think that the mere act of putting a same-sex couple on the screen made the film praise-worthy, often failing to introduce much that was entertaining on its own merits. Thus was born my "straight test," which allowed for a fairly quick barometer of quality: would anyone pay the slightest attention to the same story if the two principal characters were a man and a woman?
Jim Fall's bright, fun, frisky comedy not only passes the "straight test," it makes plenty of straight romantic comedies look positively inept by comparison. Christian Campbell stars as Gabriel, an aspiring musical-comedy composer who spends his days working temp jobs and his nights feeding the ego of his best girlfriend/aspiring singer Katherine (Tori Spelling). That doesn't leave much time to find love, let alone a one-night stand, until a trip to a bar introduces Gabriel to Mark (J. P. Pitoc), a sexy go-go dancer. They make plans for a night of simple sex, but plans go awry when every opportunity to be alone is thwarted. As the evening progresses, and Gabriel and Mark get better acquainted, simple sex begins to seem less interesting -- though also less complicated -- than the prospect of a more serious relationship.
TRICK's single-day structure may be something of a trick in itself, yet there's rarely a moment when Jason Schafer's screenplay feels forced or contrived. Sure, it falls back on humor from drag queens and cabaret performances. Both devices also happen to produce two of TRICK's funniest scenes: a Spanish-language ode to the singer's male member, and advice from a man made up to bear a startling resemblance to one of the cast members. In fact, as pure comedy, TRICK rarely stumbles. Every character gets wonderful moments, sparked by the kind of dialogue Woody Allen used to produce in his prime. Even Tori Spelling -- yes, I said Tori Spelling -- is a revelation as the blissfully self-absorbed Katherine, particularly throwing her "talents" behind a performance of Gabriel's composition "Enter You." When a director can turn Spelling into a gifted comic actress, you know he's a talent to watch for.
I suppose the reason TRICK is even more appealing than its laugh value is that it does more with a gay relationship than any film I can remember. That's probably because it isn't _just_ about a gay relationship. The adorably dimpled Christian Campbell (brother of SCREAM's Neve) makes for an appealing protagonist because he's so recognizably human in his relationship anxieties. The developing relationshp between Gabriel and Mark works the way all good romantic relationships work, exploring the way people discover surprisingly wonderful things about each other when they least expect it. The fact that the relationship develops in the midst of such entertaining comedy is a delightful bonus. The obstacles thrown in their way do begin to feel a bit contrived, but you may be having too much fun to notice. TRICK is so effortlessly charming, I may just change the name of the "straight test" to the "TRICK test."
On the Renshaw scale of 0 .
Visit Scott Renshaw's Screening Room http://www.inconnect.com/~renshaw/ *** Subscribe to receive new reviews directly by email! See the Screening Room for details, or reply to this message with subject "Subscribe".
