WONDERLAND (USA Films) Starring: Shirley Henderson, Gina McKee, Molly Parker, Ian Hart, John Simm, Stuart Townsend, Kika Markham, Jack Shepherd. Screenplay: Laurence Coriat. Producers: Michele Camarda and Andrew Eaton. Director: Michael Winterbottom. MPAA Rating: R (profanity, adult themes) Running Time: 108 minutes. Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
Director Michael Winterbottom (JUDE, WELCOME TO SARAJEVO) goes the Ken Loach route in this rough-edged, naturalistic dysfunctional family drama. The story deals witht he members of a London clan coping with various interpersonal dilemmas. Nadia (Gina McKee) searches for love in personal ads, finding men she's more likely to run from than run to; her sister Debbie (Shirley Henderson) copes with single motherhood and an irresponsible ex-husband (Ian Hart); sister Molly (Molly Parker) faces impending motherhood not realizing her husband Eddie (John Simm) is having a personal crisis. Meanwhile, their parents (Jack Shepard and Kika Markham) deal with an ever-more acrimonious marriage of their own.
Episodic stories like this one almost invariably depend on the strength of the acting and the consistency of the stories. On the first count, WONDERLAND is spot on, featuring great ensemble work. The stories, however, are much more hit and miss. In fact, not one of the sisters' lives proves particularly gripping compared to the peripheral episodes: Debbie's son Jack (Peter Marfleet) wandering alone through an amusement park; father Bill enjoying an isolated moment of joy dancing with a neighbor; Eddie rehearsing how he'll tell Molly he's quit his job. It's also frustrating how Michael Nyman's blasting score occasionally drowns out the low-key intensity of the narrative. Jack Shepard's work as the sadsack father could be enough to recommend it, but this slice of South London life is pretty sporadic in its moments of emotional force.
On the Renshaw scale of 0 .
Visit Scott Renshaw's Screening Room http://www.inconnect.com/~renshaw/ *** Subscribe to receive new reviews directly by email! See the Screening Room for details, or reply to this message with subject "Subscribe".
