Mike Leigh does not create film stories in a traditional way. His unique method of constructing scripts out of workshops with his actors has made it a safe bet that you won't find flat, flimsy characters running around in his films. You also won't find many traditional plot-driven narratives. Leigh prefers to drop his fully-realized characters into a situation, allowing them to act and react as naturally as possible. Where most film-makers write plots, Mike Leigh writes lives.
CAREER GIRLS is a traditionally non-traditional Leigh effort which begins with two solid characters -- 30ish career girls Hannah (Katrin Cartlidge) and Annie (Lynda Steadman) -- and an intriguing situation. Hannah and Annie are old college friends and former roommates who haven't seen each other for six years when Annie comes to visit Hannah in London. At first, we wonder why she bothered. The initial interactions between the two are awkward, the talk exceedingly small. All evidence suggests that the two women have so little in common they don't belong in the same genus, let alone in the same room.
Then, gradually, we begin to see them rediscover their friendship. They share a hearty laugh over the ridiculous advances of a would-be playboy (Andy Serkis); they run into old acquaintances from school; they inquire after each other's families. With unerring perception, CAREER GIRLS reveals that the single most important thing Hannah and Annie _do_ share in common is the four years they spent together. Leigh understands the power of shared history to connect people, whether friends or family, even when personalities are polar opposites. As Cartlidge and Steadman hone in on the ways in which these two women connect, spending time with them becomes a wonderful lesson in how tight some bonds can become.
So far, so very good, except that the dynamic I've just described comprises less than half of CAREER GIRLS' 87 minute running time. The majority of the film is devoted to flashbacks of the girls' college days, where another possible reason for their friendship becomes evident: they are both so irritating you can't imagine anyone else putting up with them. Annie, painfully shy as the result of a terrible skin condition, bobs her head, darts her eyes and whines; Hannah, blunt and aggressive, tosses of puns and rude remarks in a perpetually affected drone of a voice. When the ridiculously twitchy pair is joined by an even twitchier and more ridiculous pal named Ricky (Mark Benton) -- all facial tics and compulsive mannerisms -- the flashback segments of CAREER GIRLS become a real chore to sit through.
Leigh has put together more than enough fantastic work (HIGH HOPES, LIFE IS SWEET, NAKED, SECRETS & LIES) to have earned the right to a minor stumble, but the stumble in CAREER GIRLS points out the potential danger in Leigh's style. If you're going to give the audience a character-driven drama, you'd better not give them characters likely to drive them into the lobby. The college-era Hannah and Annie are shrill caricatures of bombastic and insecure college students; nothing about them or their friendship rings as true as their modern day attempts to figure out why they were friends. After making several wonderful films filled with believably complex people, Leigh has made half of a wonderful film by making only half of two wonderful characters.
On the Renshaw scale of 0 .
Visit Scott Renshaw's MoviePage http://www.inconnect.com/~renshaw/ *** Subscribe to receive new reviews directly by email! See the MoviePage for details, or reply to this message with subject line "Subscribe".
