THE WIND IN THE WILLOWS, the new live-action version by the Monty Python gang, is playing now in very limited theatrical distribution in the United States. If it comes to a city near you, as it is now in our area, you'd better see it immediately or it'll be history before you can blink an eye. And being easily one of the most unusual family films in years, you don't want to let this one slip by you. Even if you haven't got any kids - the adults outnumbered the children in our Saturday matinee audience by 10 to 1 - you don't want to miss out on this little delight.
Writer and director Terry Jones sticks fairly close to the story and the cadence of the original Kenneth Grahame novel. And his players approach their parts almost reverentially as befits such a classic. It is not until the movie's midway point, during Toad's trial, that the actors begin to really cut loose with the comedy. Up until then they keep the humor on the subtle side, which is fine since it is in its delicacy and beauty that the film is most effective. If you're looking for a cartoonish action picture, in which stupidity reigns supreme and bonks on the head are the height of comedy, this isn't it.
As filmed by CON AIR's cinematographer David Tattersall, the radiant picture has a golden autumnal look. Every one of the daylight scenes appear to have been filmed when the sun was low on the horizon, basking everything in a loving glow.
THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK's costume designer, James Acheson, came up both with the magical costumes that carefully evoke each actor's animal and with the sets worthy of a Disney theme park attraction. (In fact, those who have been to Disneyland will cherish Mr. Toad's Wild Ride even more after seeing it acted out in the movie.) The evil weasels, for example, have long orange coats and hair, dark elliptical sunglasses, and devilish little mustaches. Toady, played with wild abandon by the film's director and writer Terry Jones, has an overstuffed costume, long narrow shoes, and pond green make-up. And so forth through all of the other animals.
Steve Coogan plays a humble Mole, who starts the story off when the nefarious weasels crush his underground home. Eric Idle is Ratty, whose whiskers fold like an accordion when danger lurks. Nicol Williamson is the take-charge Badger. Antony Sher plays wicked Chief Weasel. John Cleese shows up briefly as Mr. Toad's lawyer at the trial, which is the movie's best scene. (He condemns his own client's wild driving so effectively that all the prosecution wants to do is shake his finger at Toad and go "tsk, tsk, tsk!") Stephen Fry plays the judge in the kangaroo - actually rabbit except for one weasel impersonating a rabbit - court. The judge wants to hang Toady for his reckless driving but settles for 20 years, eventually raised to 100 when Toad goes berserk in court. And finally, Michael Palin is the talking sun.
The basic plot has the weasels conniving to take over Toad's massive ancestral home, the famous Toad Hall. Toady, a classic wastrel, chases one fad after another. His current infatuation is with motor cars, and, being a miserable driver, this becomes quite an expensive hobby for him. Although played fairly straight, the show's outlandish touches, such as Toad's long tongue that he uses to catch flies and even to help him escape, are done sparingly.
The movie has not only dialog but a bit of singing as well. The whole story is developed in such an offbeat and methodical manner that many people, especially kids, may not know quite what to make of it. If they've read the book, it probably helps, but those looking for the traditional movie-going experience may be mystified by this one. For those with an open mind and heart, the picture is a treasure worth savoring. Don't miss this delicate mixture of tenderness and whimsy. If you wait, it'll be gone as fast as Toad in one of his motor cars.
THE WIND IN THE WILLOWS runs just 1:20. It is rated PG for fanciful villainy and would be fine for all ages.
My son Jeffrey, almost 9, and his friend George, age 7, thought the film was good, especially the scene in which the heroes dance on the table while punching the weasels. Jeffrey's friend Jessica, almost 9, thought the picture was okay, and said that her favorite part was when Toad dressed up as a woman to escape.
