Clay Birdwell is certainly unlucky in love. One lover's husband commits suicide in a way implicating Clay, and another lover gets shot while having sex with Clay. And those are only a few of the dead bodies that show up in director David Dobkin's little film noir called CLAY PIGEONS.
Written by Matthew L. Healy, the offbeat story follows a standard but satisfying formula of the serial killer who is being hunted by a dogged FBI agent. The movie is set in a sleepy, little western town. The sheriff's deputy, for example, is aptly named Barney. Like Barney Fife, he is a walking disaster, that is, when he isn't sleeping on the job.
Joaquin Phoenix, known as Leaf Phoenix when he acted in PARENTHOOD, plays Clay. Bringing little to the role, Joaquin's deadpan acting style is used by the director as the background canvas upon which to sketch the story.
As the always-horny wife Amanda, whose husband kills himself in the story's opening, Georgina Cates gives a convincing portrayal of a deceitful and sleazy blonde without an excess of brainpower.
Vince Vaughn steals the show as the handsome but conceited stranger named Lester Long. The happy-go-lucky Lester oozes so much charm that women almost drool over him. "I'm like a big fireworks show," he declares with his usual big smile and slightly nervous, hearty laughter. "I'm very bright." Lester takes Clay fishing but the only thing they catch is a dead body that happens to float by rather inopportunely.
The film's producer, Scott Wilson, plays Sheriff Mooney. He's a friendly sort who likes Clay and isn't much on detective work. Luckily for him and the audience, Janeane Garofalo shows up about midway through the picture and immediately enlivens it. She plays a supporting part as a veteran FBI agent on the trail of a serial killer.
Although there is not a lot to recommend the film, there isn't anything much to criticize either. It is an enjoyable enough little movie, and Garofalo is always fun to watch.
CLAY PIGEONS runs about 1:45. It is rated R for violence, sex, nudity and profanity and would be fine for older teenagers.
