BLADE is the picture for those of you who have avoided Jackie Chan movies because you think he's a wimp. As that fearless vampire killer known simply as Blade, Wesley Snipes kills more men in a single scene that Chan attacks in an entire movie. This over-the-top action is, of course, either totally cool or completely ridiculous depending on your point of view.
Arguably the most fascinating part of the movie is the carefully constructed vampire world that writer David S. Goyer lays out for us. At the top of the vampire hierarchy are the pure bloods. These elite, who meet in expensive board rooms to manage their investments, wear blue suits that would make them look like Wall Street brokers except for their walk, which gives the appearance that the suits are starched.
In BLADE the vampire social structure is in the process of being upset by a group of rebellious youngsters of a less than pure strain. Stephen Dorff plays their leader, Deacon Frost. Frost likes to take his minions to hidden raves in which blood pours from the fire sprinklers as the DJ plays heavy metal music. Frost even arranges the procurement of humans for some late night snacks.
Snipes, who has a wide acting range from action heroes (MURDER AT 1600) to lovers (ONE NIGHT STAND), rarely gets offered the best material. Regardless of the quality of script, he manages to put so much energy into it that it is usually worth watching. Some actors possess great natural talent, but with Snipes it is more his intensity and commitment that make the difference.
BLADE's director, Stephen Norrington, clearly wants to make a fast-paced, no-holds barred bloodfest, and he succeeds. If vampire pictures are your cup of tea, this is one of the better ones. (Personally, I don't think I'll ever see a better one than HABIT, which I reviewed earlier this year.) The problem with Norrington's approach is that it soon becomes highly repetitive. A half-hour would probably suffice for most viewers, and some will be so grossed out by French kissing vampires with blood drenched mouths that they will leave before the film is over anyway.
As Abraham Whistler, Kris Kristofferson plays an old character who makes the weapons for Blade to use in his attempt to wipe out the vampire nation. Even if the guns are sleek and powerful, Blade's noisy, old black Dodge Charger provides as much visceral thrill as its aging mufflers growl.
Although we learn that silver bullets and essence of garlic are the best vampire weapons, there are others. The movie leaves you with a reason not to throw out that old cancer-inducing sunlamp you have in the back of the closet. One ancient vampire, who would make Jabba the Hutt look svelte, is fried with just such a weapon.
BLADE runs 2:00. It is rated R for strong violence and vampire related gore and would be fine for most teenagers.
