Gordon Comstock, advertising copywriter par excellence, has just been given a large raise -- more precisely a "rise" since A MERRY WAR is a British film. And when his boss offers to promote him to any title he likes, Gordon chooses "Head of Creativity."
Still Gordon has a problem with which many will be able to identify. He's got a well paying job, but it's not what he wants to do. His passion is poetry. His poetry shows up in his advertising copy, but that is not enough for Gordon. Extolling the benefits of an "invigorating drink" like Bovex is not how he wants to live the rest of his life.
His boss is aghast. "Poetry, advertising -- it's all the same words only in different order," he argues.
Alan Plater's marvelous script for A MERRY WAR is based on George Orwell's satirical novel, "Keep the Aspidistra Flying." Written in 1936, a decade before Orwell's famous novels, "Animal Farm" and "1984," the novel is about a little published writer, which is exactly what Orwell was at that time. Orwell, who later became famous for political polemics, in this early novel takes a thoroughly light-hearted look at the world of business and love.
The enthralling movie has broad appeal from Dilbert fans to romantics. The movie argues convincingly that we should all follow our hearts and our passions when it comes to work and to love.
As the tenacious Gordon Comstock, Richard E. Grant shows the frustrations and the joys of one embarking on a tricky journey, trying to make money at something one really cares about. Cynically, he derides the values of the world. "Love, tenderness, money -- the greatest of these is money," he complains in a twisted version of a classical biblical aphorism.
Gordon has simple desires, and he wants to know why he can't have what his upper class publisher has. "I want to know why I can't have sex in the afternoon," he asks his girlfriend, Rosemary. As Rosemary, a studiously cute and bespectacled Helena Bonham Carter, who works as a graphics artist in the same advertising firm as Gordon, explains that he can't have sex in the afternoon because they don't have any place to go then. (Orwell has the rich publisher be an avowed socialist, probably reflecting his own conflicted state of mind. The press notes point out that at the time the novel was written Orwell was torn between conservatism and socialism.)
The bitingly funny script tells it like it is, while always displaying a big heart. When Gordon takes a job without prospects at a bookstore so he can earn enough money to continue to write, the dour owner sets him straight. "Professionally speaking, you've entered a totally blind alley." Even if such jobs are common place, it isn't often that the boss tells you this during the hiring interview.
Lovingly directed by Robert Bierman, the film contains wonderfully evocative music by Mike Batt. Inviting and magically happy, the music with its warm nostalgic feeling matches perfectly the handsome, 1930s sets and the golden cinematography.
The little story meanders delightfully like a small brook cutting through lush fields. Romantic, poignant, and exhilarating, the movie always rings true. One time Gordon laughingly complains that his mind is "constipated with similes and metaphors." With little laughs around every turn the film is as easy to watch as it is subtly substantial. It is full of messages without ever seeming to have many.
Eventually our hero finds happiness in the worst part of town. South of the river, the area is so disreputable that "even the tomcats walk in twos."
"Tuppence for a happy ending," Gordon chirps with a big smile to one of his bookstore customers. "You can't beat that for value." And this charming little movie gives full value from its beginning to its happy ending. "Remember," Rosemary reminds Gordon. "You're a poet and a free man." Follow your dreams, argues the movie, and you will be free.
A MERRY WAR runs 1:41. It is not rated but probably would be PG-13 for sexual situations. The film would be fine for kids around twelve and up.
