Takuro Yamashita, played by Koji Yakusho from the indie smash hit SHALL WE DANCE?, is the Japanese equivalent of an average Joe, what they call a salaryman. An unremarkable white-collar worker, Takuro spends his free time fishing in the evenings.
One day on the way home, while on a crowded commuter train, he reads an anonymous letter whose writer claims that his wife is having an affair while he fishes. He sneaks back early that night and catches his wife having passionate sex with another man. Grabbing a large kitchen knife, Takuro stabs both of them, killing his wife as the blood flies everywhere. Takuro rides his bicycle down to the local police station and confesses his crime.
As the beginning credits finish rolling, Takuro is paroled after serving 8 years of his sentence. The warden admonishes him not to get into any trouble. To the detriment of the movie, that is exactly what he does, avoiding confrontation and concentrating on living as serene a life as possible.
Takuro saves a young, suicidal woman named Keiko Hattori (Misa Shimizu), who looks like the wife he murdered. They come to live together. She cooks for him while he spends his time as a barber during the day and a fisherman at night. (When he ever gets a chance to sleep is the story's biggest mystery.)
Set in the Japanese countryside that is rarely shown to American audiences, the film is handsomely photographed by Shigeru Komatsubara. The scenes of the fishing boats at twilight are particularly striking. They carry a little lamp to cut through the fog, and its light casts a lovely glow.
The film, which won the Palm d'Or award last year at Cannes, is directed by Shohei Imamura. Although it starts off like a sports car barreling down the highway in high gear, the director shifts into neutral right after the opening credits end and coasts until almost all momentum is lost. He shifts back into gear briefly toward the end, but by then the dramatic energy has been drained away.
The story contains numerous metaphorical references to Takuro's pet eel. Contemplating their possible meanings provides the best way to stay awake until the end.
THE EEL runs too long at 1:57. The film is in Japanese with English subtitles. It is not rated but would be an R for violence, sex and nudity and would be acceptable for teenagers only if they are older and mature.
