The human-looking pets in FANTASTIC PLANET, a science-fiction allegory, are about the size of mice. And like mice, they are cute as domestic pets, but those found in the wild are dirty creatures that are to be killed without question.
Winner of the 1973 Grand Jury Prize at Cannes and released at the time to critical acclaim in the United States, the film has a gorgeous new 35-millimeter print and is currently being re-released for its 25th anniversary.
After years of reviewing movies, one begins to establish certain parameters for a movie in one's mind. Films may push various envelopes, but they are all constructed within certain bounds of the motion picture medium. FANTASTIC PLANET (LA PLANETE SAUVAGE), on the other hand, has a handsome look and a mesmerizing feeling that seems to belong to some species other than traditional motion pictures.
The French-Czechoslovakian animated movie is constructed of richly elaborate but frequently static images. Certainly not a kids' movie, the Orwellian story is packed with intricate messages within a deceptively, simple structure.
Set on the Planet Ygam, the movie creates a world led by an intellectual race known as the Draggs. These luxurious, blue creatures with blood-red eyes wile away their time meditating and increasing their knowledge. These ultimate intellectuals keep Oms as pets, Oms being the aforementioned human-like animals.
Director Rene Laloux uses the film's striking but unusual visual style to entrance the viewer, while the terse story, based on Stefan Wul's novel, "Oms en Serie," is full of complex meanings.
The story concerns an Om named Terr, who is adopted as a pet when only a baby by Tiwa, a daughter of one of the Dragg elites. Told from Terr's perspective, the movie has little Terr growing up and accidentally learning the knowledge kept only for the Draggs. Late in the story, when the Draggs decide the Oms have grown too numerous, they embark on an Om extermination process called de-Oming.
I'll admit that I read the film's description before the press screening and almost decided to skip it. If I had followed with my instincts, I would have missed something unforgettable and unique. If there ever was a film that needed to be experienced in order to be appreciated, this is it. Reading critics' words about it just does not do it justice.
FANTASTIC PLANET runs 1:12. It is rated PG and contains full-frontal nudity, violence and mature themes. The film would be fine for teenagers.
