The land of the midnight sun can be tough on a detective trying to solve a murder case. Near the arctic circle at a time when the sun never sets, it's hard for the detective to get much sleep, especially when he has accidentally made himself part of the case.
As economically directed by Erik Skjoldbaerg, INSOMNIA, the lean and atmospheric tale written by Nikolaj Frobenius, is not compelled to explain everything. Although it's not hard to follow, the story happily leaves the actions and motivations of many of the characters ambiguous.
A film without much dialog like INSOMNIA requires a strong leading actor to carry it. Stellan Skarsgard from BREAKING THE WAVES, GOOD WILL HUNTING and RONIN delivers a masterful performance as Jonas Engstrom, the Swedish cop with a reputation for doing whatever it takes to crack a case. Skarsgard's acting temperament makes him a perfect choice for the role of the stoic policeman.
Jonas has been called to the far north of Norway to solve the case of a murdered 17-year-old girl. The methodical killer had cleaned the body afterwards and even washed her hair so that no clues would be left. The girl had had a big fight with her teenage boyfriend the night of the murder, and he doesn't have an alibi. She had also been seeing an older man who gave her expensive clothing. These two are immediate suspects.
When the case goes horribly wrong, Jonas begins to fear that he will be arrested, so he creates an elaborate web of deception. With his lack of sleep and his palpable exhaustion, Jonas becomes increasingly paranoid as he chases the killer. Several scenes are set in his hotel room during the bright night as he tries in vain to cover his windows effectively so he can get some much-needed sleep.
Racked with guilt for his mistakes and fearing the worst, Jonas pushes his body past its level of endurance, causing himself, more than once, to almost fall asleep at the wheel. Erling Thurmann-Andersen's penetrating cinematography shows every pore and line in Jonas's troubled face.
The director pays careful attention to the small details. The background sounds, for example, are so low that even a kiss sounds like a small explosion. This lack of ambient noise allows him to emphasize the minutia of the case that might otherwise have been missed.
To say that a movie makes you sleepy is generally the ultimate insult, but not this time. Skarsgard delivers such an emphatic performance that audiences may begin to feel just as fatigued as Jonas. And with that drowsiness comes a heightened appreciation for exactly what he is having to endure.
INSOMNIA runs just 1:37. The film is in Norwegian with English subtitles. It is not rated but would be an R for brief intense gore, sex, nudity and profanity and would be fine for teenagers.
