As Claire Cooper, Annette Bening has been having some dreams lately, and they're not of sugarplums dancing in her head. Asleep and awake, she has horrific visions of a man who leads little girls to their death. In his best creepy style Robert Downey Jr. plays the serial killer, whose demonic acts have seized control of Claire's brain.
Written and directed by THE CRYING GAME's Neil Jordan, IN DREAMS wants to be more than the typical psychological horror film, but it only partially succeeds. Jordan is well versed in ways of divulging facts in bits and pieces so that he can maintain the suspense. However, the movie is rooted in the over-the-top horror movie genre, and this proves to be its downfall.
The plot involves a town that 25 years ago was flooded to make way for a new reservoir. The killer claims to have been chained to a bed in the town when it was flooded. He's now a grown man who goes around the thick woods, stealing little girls and then killing them. Apparently he wants to stop so he causes Claire to dream his future violent actions.
As is de rigueur in this genre, everyone around Claire thinks she's nuts when she predicts the upcoming crimes. Aidan Quinn plays her confused husband, who thinks the answer to Claire's difficulties is medical help. As Dr. Silverman, Claire's psychiatrist, Stephen Rea doesn't believe a word Claire says. She has a simple explanation for her bizarre behavior. "I'm not obsessed; I'm possessed!" Claire with wild, bleary eyes tells her doctor.
As the movie grinds on, it becomes increasing familiar. Claire spends more and more of her time in padded rooms and strapped to beds, while her doctors drug her to calm her down. Annette Bening does the best she can with a role that almost demands overacting.
By the predictable last act, in which Claire finally gets to confront the man from her dreams, the movie has deteriorated from intriguing to tiresome. At least the way in which Claire ultimately gets back at her tormentor is satisfying.
IN DREAMS runs 1:40. It is rated R for violence and profanity and would be fine for teenagers.
