Nerdy 15-year-old Max Fischer, played by a perfectly cast Jason Schwartzman, might appear to have it all. A student at an elite private school named Rushmore; he participates in every extracurricular activity on campus from backgammon to beekeeping to wrestling. And he's constantly on the prowl for opportunities to establish new clubs. No activity is too mundane for Max to organize. As he sees it, even the old recess game sometimes called dodgeball, in which kids throw a ball at each other, deserves incorporation into a school-sponsored sport.
With his prominent braces, bookish glasses and exceedingly plain looks, Max overcompensates by being the only boy at school to a wear a blazer and tie. In a fancy prep school, he's the preppiest kid on campus.
Max's talents appear limitless. He even writes, directs and produces his own plays, including a realistic Vietnam war drama that requires his audience to wear earplugs and safety goggles in case the bazooka or other parts of the dangerously real pyrotechnics go awry.
RUSHMORE, written by Wes Anderson and Owen Wilson and directed by Wes Anderson, isn't a movie that's easy to pigeonhole. The trailers would lead you to believe that it's a comedy and probably a bad slapstick one. The movie is certainly funny, and, unlike what the trailers suggest, it isn't that over-the-top. In addition to the humor, the story has two quirky romances and some sweet undertones. Most of all, it's a poignant tale about two people who have had limited success in their lives.
Although Max excels at some things, academically and socially he's am unqualified disaster. As the story opens, he has been put on "academic sudden death" because of his poor grades. (Max demands documentation. A kid's got to know his rights.)
In a supporting role that the studio hopes will garner him an Oscar nomination, Bill Murray plays Herman Blume, the school's superrich supporter. Herman is bored stiff with his life and his family, and he is cursed with a pair of obnoxious twins who attend Rushmore. In an empathetic performance, Murray takes an understated approach. With just the rolling of his eyes, he imparts a deliciously mocking humor, revealing how bereft his character is of any joy in his life. Herman may be financially well off, but he is terminally unhappy.
Perhaps the film's best scene occurs when Herman tries to obtain a little solitude during a party at his house by floating underwater in the swimming pool. A kid also dives under and stares at him, thus destroying his fleeting moment of peace. The incident is reminiscent of THE GRADUATE, as is some of the rest of this unusual motion picture.
Both Max and Herman fall in love Rosemary Crosswith, a new teacher at Rushmore. Olivia Williams, the female lead from THE POSTMAN, plays Rosemary with an inviting sweetness. Rosemary tells Max that he's too young for her, but that doesn't dissuade him. Ever resourceful, he finds out what he thinks are her passions and then lobbies to obtain them for her. From keeping Latin as part of the curriculum to building an aquarium, no challenge is too daunting for him.
Robert D. Yeoman's cinematography gives the picture a bleak and austere look that has a FARGOish feel to it. The images are colorful, yet flat and devoid of warmth, reflecting the desperation of the characters.
It's not often that two award pins can summarize a person's life, but Max's pins can. Prominently displayed on his sport coat are his awards for "Perfect Attendance" and "Punctuality." If, as Woody Allen said, "90% of life is just showing up," Max does have some major accomplishments to his credit.
RUSHMORE runs 1:33. It is rated R for profanity and mature themes and would be fine for teenagers.
