In town to receive an award from San Jose's Cinequest film festival, Jennifer Beals chose a funny, touching and controversial film of hers, 1997's THE TWILIGHT OF THE GOLDS, to accompany the award presentation. The movie, written by Jonathan Tolins and based on his play, tells the story of a couple who finds through genetic testing that their unborn son will be gay. You may have trouble believing a few of the characters' reactions, but, if you haven't yet come to appreciate Jennifer Beals's acting talents, you will after watching this movie. She is astounding, not with dramatic bravado, but with a deep inner strength that she brings to the part of the new mother. Beals said she likes scripts like this one that make her "want to take care of the character," which she does here with grace and power, stealing the movie from a good cast.
The film starts with a seemingly happy party at the maternal grandparents-to-be's house. Garry Marshall and Faye Dunaway play the grandparents, Walter and Phyllis Gold. There with the big "we're pregnant" secret is Suzanne Stein (Jennifer Beals) and her husband Rob (Jon Tenney). The peace of the evening is shattered by the prejudice the parents show toward their grown, gay son, David Gold, played by Brendan Fraser from GODS AND MONSTERS and BLAST FROM THE PAST. Using both his comedic and his dramatic skills, Fraser gives an unflinchingly strong performance.
The first hint that trouble is brewing in Gold country is when David sarcastically remarks about the absence of his long-time, live-in lover, Steven (Sean O'Bryan). "Steven sends his regards," he tells everyone with a big smile. "He would have come, but he wasn't invited." Lest we think the attitude problem lies in any way with David, his mother certainly lets us know how deep her homophobia goes. Without thinking, she barks at her daughter, telling her not to eat a macaroon since David's lips have touched it. Many viewers will find that the actions of the characters sometimes stretch credulity, but the script, with one exception, never goes too far afield. You may loathe the way that David and his friends are treated, but the movie doesn't make the parents into easy-to-write-off devils. They are in many ways wonderful parents, unlike Rob's parents who are uniformly oppressive.
The story's first act uses some hilarious but biting comedy to relax and entertain the audience. "Are they sure?" Walter asks about the experimental genetic test. "They're doctors," his wife retorts. "They're never sure. They just tell you enough to destroy you." As Suzanne and Rob are just starting to grapple with the issue of whether to keep or abort the gay fetus, David is busy with his opera production. He's presenting a small-scale -- 6 hour rather than the normal 23 hour --version of Wagner's Ring Cycle. After he gets a sponsor, it is billed as "Blimpie Presents Wagner's Mini Ring."
Just when you've pushed back in your chair and relaxed a bit, the more intense second act begins and the comedy turns to drama. When confronted, Walter admits to David that he considers him "sick and diseased" and that they probably would have aborted him if they had had the test available back then.
Second-time director Ross Kagan Marks is more adept at the comedic portions of the story that the drama. The first act flows rapidly and smoothly and scores just as many points about the tragedy of the situation as the dramatic second act. Any flaws in the direction, however, are ameliorated by the quietly dominating performance of Jennifer Beals. Even in the second act, the comedy provides much of the dramatic punch. David asks, for example, "What if Orson Welles's mom didn't want a fat one?"
Most of the problems with the story come back to basic plausibility. Assuming that there is a 90% accurate test that can predict homosexuality is a stretch. And then late in the story there is a tragedy that is so clearly nothing more than a cheap plot device that it again reminds us of the weaknesses of the storyline. Yet even with its limitations, the movie knows how to touch your heart and tickle your funny bone.
THE TWILIGHT OF THE GOLDS runs a fast 1:32. It is rated PG-13 for mature themes and a little profanity and would be fine for kids around 12 and up.
