Fasten your seatbelts and put on your thinking caps because the Wachowski brothers are back, and they're about to take you on a wild ride, one quite unlike any you've been on before.
THE MATRIX is the second film by the writing and directing duo of Andy and Larry Wachowski, who last brought us the intriguing and unusual crime drama BOUND. This time they turn their considerable talents to making a fascinating science fiction film that is both a mind-boggling enigma and a thrilling action movie that rarely disappoints.
As the movie starts, we meet a lithe, athletic woman named Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss), who runs like the wind and leaps across tall buildings with a single bound. When sprinting, her body seems to compress as if it needs to be more aerodynamic. Although you might think she is an invincible superwoman, there are "agents" chasing her who are more powerful than she.
In a movie that wants to challenge your assumptions, it is not clear who are the good guys and who are the bad and which side each is on. Heck, it's not even clear if it's the past, the present or the future. It's even more complicated than that. Is what we are watching just a game, a dream, a simulation or what? See what I mean about thinking caps?
Trinity locates one Thomas "Neo" Anderson to tell him that Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne) has been searching for him. Neo, played with just the right amount of bewilderment by a perfectly cast Keanu Reeves, has himself been on a search, and it's not clear who is the searcher and who is the searchee.
"They're watching you." Trinity warns Neo. "Who is?" a perplexed Neo asks. She warns him about the aforementioned agents. Eventually the agents, led by an Agent Smith (Hugo Weaving), give Leo their own admonition. Looking like Gestapo dressed in Blues Brothers clothing, they inform him that Morpheus is "the most dangerous man alive," and they want to enlist his help in tracking Morpheus down.
At the heart of the mystery is something called the "matrix." With colossal bad judgment, most film critics are revealing too much about what the matrix is. Suffice it to say that it is bizarre and fascinating. The "X-Files" is straightforward in comparison.
The staging is marvelously imaginative. Working in his cubicle, Neo gets a phone sent to him via FedEx. As soon as he opens the package, the phone drops out and immediately starts ringing. Answering it, the caller barks orders to Neo on how to escape the men who suddenly start chasing him. The energetic story moves with the power of a rocket on a trajectory to an unknown destination, and it isn't clear whether it's heaven or hell.
Shot by cinematographer Bill Pope in the same denuded color style as he used on BOUND, the film's look is striking. Along with the sleek and cold, futuristic feel, the eerie music pulsates with a heavy bass foundation. The film's sound is awesome as are its special effects, the best of which have to do with literally dodging bullets.
The film constantly surprises you. The bad guys, for example, have an extremely clever and creepy bugging device.
When Neo admits his total confusion about what is happening and whether it is "real," Morpheus has an answer of sorts. "What is real?" Morpheus asks. "How do you define real?"
The Wachowski brothers manage to make the abstract concepts of virtual reality and artificial intelligence, subjects hard to translate to the big screen, both fascinating and compelling. But what does it all mean? As Cypher (Joe Pantoliano), one of Morpheus's men puts it, "It means buckle your seatbelt Dorothy because Kansas is going bye-bye." Agent Smith explains it differently. "Never send a man to do a machine's job," he says.
Usually confusion is the sign of a bad filmmaker who is unable to construct an understandable narrative. Here, this exhilarating and challenging movie works precisely because it is a logical labyrinth. Some movies leave you feeling cheated, but this will likely leave you with an exhausted satisfaction. If you have any energy left, the one word on your lips will likely be "Wow!"
THE MATRIX runs 2:10, but feels much shorter. It is rated R for sci-fi violence and a little profanity and would be fine for teenagers.
