For it's 15th anniversary, Jonathan Demme's classic concert film STOP MAKING SENSE is being re-released with a new print and a remastered Dolby Digital soundtrack. Starring David Byrne as well as the other members of The Talking Heads, the film is certain to delight their fans. With minimalist staging, lighting and camerawork, the concert documentary may have a more limited appeal for those who aren't fond of Byrne's strident singing style.
Older movies with large cult followings are some of the hardest films to review. People have already made up their minds about them. Anything less than complete praise will be derided by their fans. And those who didn't like the movie in the first place probably will not bother to read the review.
For the record, I've liked a lot of music movies in which the music was not of the type I normally enjoy. I've loved rock concert movies (MESSAGE TO LOVE), rock documentaries (HYPE!) and rock musicals (PINK FLOYD: THE WALL). STOP MAKING SENSE, on the other hand, did nothing for me.
David Byrne is a hyper-energetic singer and dancer. With his lean, gangly body, his thin, geekish face and his exaggerated clothing, Byrne stands out in any crowd. (He was at our press screening and has changed little over the years.) He belts out his songs as if loudness were the most important attribute of singing. His aerobic dancing, however, is mesmerizing. He walks like a bird, undulates like a wave, jogs like a yuppie and prances like a boxer. The guy must be in tip-top shape to endure his performances, and it is easy to see why he remains so lithe.
"The girls can do it too!" the drummer yells out to start the only segment not featuring Byrne. Called the Tom Tom Club, this silly segment is the film's one attempt at comedy. Even though I was glad for a respite from Byrne's voice, I missed his stage antics.
The movie, filmed at a live concert, consists of a rapid succession of songs without breaks. If you like them, you will probably feel like a kid in a candy shop, in which the owner says you have an hour and a half to eat all the candy you want. And if you don't like the songs, the film can sometimes feel like living next door to a neighbor who plays loud, harsh music that filters through your walls even when you have the windows shut tight. Luckily, Byrne's high spirits and undeniable charisma offers something for everyone.
STOP MAKING SENSE runs 1:28. It is rated PG and has nothing to offend any age.
