THE MASK OF ZORRO's Catherine Zeta-Jones firmly establishes her star power in ENTRAPMENT. With a dazzling performance, she dominates the picture with absolute assurance and a bewitching smile.
An actress who breaks the popular mold, she's not a teenager, not anorexic and not a martial arts master. An incredibly beautiful actress, Zeta-Jones has much more than looks going for her. So intelligent and likable, she's an action star somewhat like Diana Rigg in her prime. Zeta-Jones has delicate, ballet-like movements, but her strength, which shines through her every frame in ENTRAPMENT, is her charismatic confidence. Never has a smile possessed more power.
Cast opposite Zeta-Jones is someone of equal intelligence, grace, and looks, Sean Connery. Although showing his age a bit, he is still a force to be reckoned with. Like a chess game between grand masters, Zeta-Jones and Connery match wits and savoir-faire. With great chemistry together, they engage in an acting battle that is as mesmerizing as the story itself. In the end, the old pro is outclassed by the younger rival, she's 30, but both do themselves proud, delivering wonderful performances.
As we meet Virginia "Gin" Baker (Zeta-Jones), a crackerjack insurance investigator, she is hot on the trail of Robert "Mac" MacDougal (Connery), whom she suspects has just pulled off a daring skyscraper robbery of an expensive painting. She's been following him for 5 years now. Her boss (Will Patton) maligns Mac's skills, saying, he's "60-years-old -- he ain't no spring chicken." Still, Gin is convinced that Mac did it and gets herself sent to London to set up a trap.
As directed by Jon Amiel (COPYCAT) and written by Ronald Bass (RAINMAN and BLACK WIDOW) and Michael Hertzberg, the movie concentrates as much energy on the relationships as the action. The action is imaginative and exciting, but it can't compare with the human drama. Zeta-Jones steals every scene no matter how suave Connery acts, and he delivers an excellent performance that is his best in years. The story contains several surprising twists, some of which you'll probably guess and others which you won't. Your enjoyment of the picture doesn't depend on your being fooled. The movie will be just about as entertaining even if you figure out every turn in advance.
Some movies get tripped up by their implausibility, while others thrive, even if one must suspend disbelief. ENTRAPMENT is in the latter category. In fact, implausibility can sometimes prove an advantage. While on the job, Gin sleeps in the nude with make-up that lasts the night. Although all we get to see is her backside, she certainly has an exceptional one.
Gin tries to convince Mac that she is a thief and has a big job that requires his help. Mac sizes her up right away. "Has there ever been anyone you couldn't manipulate, beguile or seduce?" he asks with a twinkle in his eye. Without need for thought, she replies with a simple "no," giving him one of her million dollar smiles in the process.
As Mac's smart-mouthed assistant, Ving Rhames provides much of the story's humor. It's a small part, but Rhames manages to make it seem larger. The film's only disappointment is Maury Chaykin, who plays a Jabba the Hutt clone that should have been eliminated as a bad distraction from what is otherwise a completely satisfying narrative.
If Zeta-Jones continues improving at her current rapid rate of acceleration, by her next movie, Jan De Bont's THE HAUNTING with Liam Neeson, she should be astounding.
ENTRAPMENT runs 1:54. It is rated PG-13 for a little violence, sexuality and profanity and would be fine for kids around 9 and up. I would have taken my 10-year-old if I had known how mild it was.
