Let's cut to the chase and answer the second most important question in every moviegoer's mind. Is the new STAR WARS, more formally known as STAR WARS EPISODE I - THE PHANTOM MENACE, as good as the last 3?
But, THE PHANTOM MENACE is a visually audacious triumph whose look far surpasses the first three. A thoroughly entertaining motion picture, it is a PG-rated treat for the entire family. This brings me to the most asked question, how do you snag some early tickets to the most widely anticipated film since GONE WITH THE WIND? To this cinematic conundrum, this review will offer no guidance.
Written and directed by George Lucas, the movie works best when it's at its busiest. As armies of computer-generated figures war with each other, the movie infuses the audience with a visceral excitement that's palpable. Your adrenaline will pump as if you personally are taking on those cleverly designed robotic soldiers of the future.
If the look and the impressive sound are the picture's high points, the charisma-challenged characters are its low points. The uninspired casting features some well-known actors who seem oddly out of place and some new actors who don't.
There isn't a Han Solo class character to be found anywhere on this mission. Harrison Ford, with his macho swagger and his humorous energy and charm, is sadly missed. No one with his abilities is found anywhere in this cast. If some are to the manor born, Ford's natural home is in a space opera series like STAR WARS or an old-fashioned adventure anthology like INDIANA JONES.
In this STAR WARS prequel, Liam Neeson plays the Jedi master Qui-Gon Jinn, and Ewan McGregor plays his apprentice, Obi-Wan Kenobi. Giving restrained and wooden performances, these fine actors look like they feel awkward and somehow slightly embarrassed in their roles. I expected them to warm up to their characters, but they never did. Both act way below their potential.
The biggest disappointment comes from the story's villain, Darth Maul (Ray Park), who looks like a lumpy-headed soccer hooligan. With all looks and no menace, Darth Maul's no Darth Vader, not even close. He's more like a video game opponent who's waiting to be sliced and diced. To emphasize how mean he's supposed to be, they give him a double-ended lightsaber. This reminded me of the scene from SPINAL TAP, in which they claim that their band is the best because the volume on their amplifier goes to 11 rather 10 like the other bands' amplifiers do.
The pleasures in the casting come from relative newcomers Natalie Portman as Queen Amidala and Jake Lloyd as Anakin Skywalker. Much has already been written about the latter, with people divided between those who find Jake Lloyd's performance endearing and those who think it's lifeless. I'm in the former camp. With his confident charm he is the one of the best reasons to get excited about the future episodes.
The movie's most exhilarating scene comes in a big pod racing extravaganza that's lifted straight out of BEN HUR. The technological tour de force crowd scenes alone are worth the price of admission. A two-headed race announcer supplies the humor in a picture that is sadly bereft of much comedy.
The lovable R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) and C-3PO (Anthony Daniels) are back, but they aren't allocated anywhere near the screen time that they deserve -- a waste of one of moviedom's best comedy duos.
The dialog has classic STAR WARS lingo. ("Be wary, I feel a disturbance in the force," is one of the many canonical lines.) Yoda, with his famous fractured syntax, is back for a cameo part. "Ah, hard to see, the dark side is," he lectures Anakin. The retreads are fun, but what is missing are many memorable new lines.
John Williams's wonderfully dramatic music draws heavily on his previous work for the series yet still manages to be fresh. Gavin Bocquet's lavish sets are visually enthralling with the Queen's large Italian Renaissance palace with its massive marble columns being among the handsomest.
The typical STAR WARS plot involves the federation trying to kidnap the queen and enslave her people. But the thin and sometimes confusing plot is all just a backdrop for the action. The middle section of the movie gets bogged down with the machinations of Senate bureaucrats squabbling over issues ranging from taxes to trade to leadership. Sometimes, you may feel like screaming at the screen, "all right already, let's get back to the action." If we want to hear about bickering politicians, we can read the newspaper.
So is THE PHANTOM MENACE a disappointment? A little. The first three movies were such a huge success and built such a loyal following of fans; the hype that ensued was to be expected. With such enormous hype comes an inevitable disappointment. But is the movie one that you wouldn't want to miss? Absolutely. See it on the largest screen you can find and with the best sound possible. This is a big event. Don't miss it. And don't even consider waiting until it comes out on video.
STAR WARS EPISODE I - THE PHANTOM MENACE runs 2:11. It is rated PG for some sci-fi violence and would be fine for all ages.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, thought it was almost better than the first 3 and gave it ****. He liked the dialog, especially, "destroy them (pause) all of them." He went on and on about the things he liked, including the music, the relationships, the figures and the action. He couldn't think of anything in the movie he didn't like.
