In Daniel Lee's BLACK MASK, famed Hong Kong martial arts star Jet Li turns pacifist.
Fat chance.
Li's days as a mild mannered librarian named Tsui are numbered. As soon as the story's main plot kicks into gear, Li becomes the superhuman superhero known as Black Mask. (The plot involves the canonical warring drug lords, but it is of no consequence. The story is only a distraction. The movie's whole purpose is to revel in obscenely violent action sequences.)
This movie could be dedicated to those adults who secretly crave hideously violent video games but wouldn't be caught dead playing one. With a popcorn box for a joystick they can control the action, slaughtering one outrageous villain after another.
How many different ways can one human destroy and maim another? Let us count the ways.
There's the bomb in a living man's chest so that the bomb squad has to perform open chest surgery. Oops, cut the artery, er wire. Ka'boom! There's the garden-style sprinkler with enough acid to wipe out an entire gang with a single swirl. And there's the 6-year-old girl's legs mailed to her father in a wooden box. I'm getting nauseated. Let's stop this disgusting enumeration.
The movie works sporadically only as a parody of its own genre. Even as a gorefest, it manages to drag frequently. Perhaps the repetition just wears out your senses.
To its credit the stunts are impressive. Too impressive some will argue. But, for those of you who thought PULP FICTION was too tame, this is the picture for you.
BLACK MASK runs 1:30. The new release in the theaters is done with a surprisingly credible English dubbing. The 1996 video has English subtitles and doesn't have the new soundtrack. The film contains massive, strong violence, profanity and sadomasochism. It is inappropriately rated R since it is clearly an NC-17 film and should be treated as such by parents. (The MPAA remains incredibly liberal about violence but is very squeamish about nudity. Which do you think is more dangerous to today's teens?) If you're worried about your kids seeing violent images, this is the quintessential film for them to avoid.
