John Sayles (LONE STAR) is one of the world's best cinematic storytellers. Typically writing, directing and editing, as he did in LIMBO, he makes movies the way he wants. In a time of plodding plots and silly scripts his works stands head and shoulders above most of the others. With meticulous stories containing heartfelt, but never overdrawn, characters, his work has a subtle honesty that leaves you in awe of his talent.
Sayles's movies have a strong sense of place and community. LIMBO is set in an Alaska populated with ambitious, boastful developers ("Think of Alaska as one big theme park"), roaming bands of geriatric tourists and average working class folk. The latter is the subject of Sayles's tale.
Joe Gastineau, played with an endearing reserve by Sayles veteran David Strathairn, is -- or more accurately was -- a fisherman. His last girlfriend broke up with him for being "too downbeat." He's a middle-aged guy who has never married and doesn't feel the need to talk about why. He's the sort who keeps quiet as much because it's a part of his nature as because there is anything to hide.
Lately he's been casting his glances toward a new singer in town, Donna de Angelo (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio). Donna's a single mom with a high school daughter named Noelle (Vanessa Martinez). Although mother and daughter are both good people, sometimes it seems the only things they have in common are their allergies. Donna's allergic to wool and Noelle is allergic to her mom's boyfriends.
Donna, who has sung in "36 states and the territory of Puerto Rico," appears to change lovers faster than states. Dating guys with "loser" written on their tattoos, she has sort of a reverse Midas touch when it comes to men. Still, she has her limits. She brags that she has never stooped so low as to date a drummer.
This time she has her eyes set on Joe, perhaps the only decent man she's ever sought. Her life has been coming apart at the seams lately, which for her is pretty much status quo. Joe looks like the type of gentleman that might finally make the difference for her.
Sayles, a sublime stager of subtle movements, has Mastrantonio give a knowing smile and raise her eyebrows in a tentative, furtive motion in order to signify her romantic interests. Later Joe and Donna will kiss a few times, but nothing will surpass the erotic spark of that earlier look she gives him.
The chemistry between these two very different types is genuine and tender. He loves the outdoors, but she warns him of her loathing for it. "Things where you wear gear rather than clothing, I don't do," she explains.
The story's first half, which is a little too slow and cluttered with extraneous characters and subplots, is full of ominous tales of horror. Many scenes set at the town's bar have the locals talking about the natural dangers of the area. More fisherman than you can count have "bought it" in a variety of horrific accidents that have cost them their lives. And then there's the winter. Many end up blowing their brains out through the depression caused by the cold, the unrelenting darkness and the lack of gainful employment.
The second half of the story, when the inevitable tragedy strikes, is when the film really comes into its own. The three, Joe, Donna and Noelle, form a sometimes contentious but deep bond during this section. The story's emotional impact is intense even while the tragedy has an undeniable tranquility to it. The characters, which were well developed in the first half, are finely polished in the last half.
The show's ending will be talked about for years. Suffice it to say that I thought it was absolutely perfect. It is probably proof, however, that Sayles doesn't test screen his movies or, if he does, he promptly throws away the survey cards.
LIMBO runs 2:00. It is rated R for some violence and a little profanity and would be fine for kids 12 and up.
