Never has poverty looked more inviting than in Wim Wenders's BUENA VISTA SOCIAL CLUB. A documentary about Cuban music, it's also a homage to the people of Havana and to Havana itself. Shot on digital video with heavily oversaturated colors, the movie shows off the city's radiant beauty to maximum effect.
Dilapidated buildings with peeling paint are made so appealing that they look like Paul Gauguin paintings. The cars, being all pre-Castro American, make the movie feel like something between a time warp and a classic auto show.
The real attraction of the movie, however, is its concert footage, introducing most of us to music that we've heard little of before. With haunting rhythms and soulful lyrics, the heartfelt songs strike an emotional chord deep within our psyche. From the very first note, the music grabs the audience with a visceral intensity and never lets go.
In its heyday, all of the best bands played at the "Buena Vista Social Club" in Havana. The movie includes music from many of these groups. The culmination of the picture is their 1998 Carnegie Hall concert. The film argues convincingly that this was their last concert together. Given that most of the musicians are in their 70s, 80s, and 90s, the picture probably does represent a last opportunity to see them together.
Whenever the energetic music plays, the film is sublime. Songs of love are among the most popular, but there are other playful ones as well. In one, an unfortunate woman named Tula has her bedroom catch fire. Then, again, perhaps this song was meant to be understood in metaphor.
The movie bogs down only when the music stops. Some of the stories are interesting, as the one in which 92-year-old Compay Segundo explains how he came to start smoking cigars at age 5. Others, as in the long window-shopping episode along Broadway, are unnecessary distractions. These non-musical segments appear with increasing frequency toward the picture's end and almost kill the documentary's momentum.
One piece of advice to filmgoers. When you are ready to experience this good-spirited and infectiously happy musical documentary, choose your theater carefully. Only ones with adequate legroom will do. No matter how hard you try, your feet will prove uncontrollable from the moment the music starts. There is no need to punish them by confining them to a tight enclosure.
Finally, a suggestion to theater owners. Have copies of the CD available for purchase in the lobby. This will be the easiest sell you will ever make.
BUENA VISTA SOCIAL CLUB runs 1:41. The film has Spanish dialog and songs, both with English subtitles. It is not rated but would be a G as there is nothing to offend anyone of any age.
