Sitting through Eric Rohmer's AUTUMN TALE (CONTE D'AUTOMNE) is rather like being trapped at a small dinner party with a half-dozen, loquacious strangers. As they drone on and on, you realize why this form of conversation is called small talk. The people seated around you are nice enough, but nothing they have to say holds much genuine interest for you.
The story, written by Rohmer, concerns a middle-aged winemaker, Magali (Béatrice Romand), and her lack of a love life. A divorcée whose kids have recently left home, she throws herself into her work. An earthy woman with frizzy hair twice the size of her head, she claims to be no longer particularly interested in men, which means, of course, that she is.
The story is about two matchmakers who try to fix her up with a new husband.
Her son's girlfriend, Rosine (Alexia Portal), is one, but not for the reason you might imagine. Rosine has fallen for the mother, and not, as she points out, in a mother-daughter sort of way. She tries to get her ex-boyfriend, Etienne (Didier Sandre), an older teacher of hers, interested in Magali. Rosine's boyfriend thinks this is nuts. "Your ex as my stepfather!" he says in shock. "It'd be monstrous!" This is further complicated by the fact that Etienne still likes Rosine.
The other one trying to locate a husband for Magali is her long-time friend, Isabelle (Marie Rivière). Isabelle's solution is to run an ad in the personals section of the newspaper, using Magali's name. Through this ruse, Isabelle, as Magali, checks out a would-be suitor, Gérald (Alain Libolt). When he proves acceptable, she tells him the truth and then arranges for him to meet the real Magali.
As an outline, the story has promise. The script, however, gives the characters lots to say but very little of interest. One long sequence, for example, involves a discussion of weeds.
The director, who has done much better work (RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS being a recent favorite), keeps his actors here on a short leash. The acting stays within such narrow emotive ranges that the picture will likely put many to sleep. AUTUMN TALE isn't a bad movie, but one that has little to recommend it.
AUTUMN TALE runs a long 1:52. The film is in French with English subtitles. It is rated PG for mild thematic elements. It would be fine for any age but would probably not interest kids less than 13.
