Shiloh, a sad but lovable little beagle and one of the cutest dogs around, is back for his second movie in SHILOH 2: SHILOH SEASON, a direct-to-video sequel to SHILOH, a movie that two years ago garnered so much critical acclaim. The new story about the power of "a little bit of kindness" is full of old-fashioned values and homespun wisdom. It tries hard to teach without being preachy.
Some of the cast is back from the original, but many are new. Zachary Browne replaces Blake Heron as Marty Preston, Shiloh's now 12-year-old owner. Browne is best known for his recurring role on TV's "ER." Dale Rosenbloom again writes the script, this time based on the second in Phyllis Reynolds Naylor's Shiloh trilogy, which means that we can probably expect a SHILOH 3.
Marty is still having run-ins with Judd Travers (Scott Wilson), "a plain bad apple" who lives nearby. Judd is a mean alcoholic who drinks even when hunting or driving. He abuses any animals unlucky enough to cross his path, and, in the original, he owned and mistreated adorable little Shiloh. He's also a tobacco spitter, which can be pretty gross on the screen and thoroughly defines his character.
Judd threatens Marty every chance he gets. Whereas most kids' movies suffer from having villains that aren't real, Judd, a wiry loner, is exactly the explosive type of individual who is so scary in real life.
With hunting season coming and Judd drinking heavily, the threats seem more ominous than ever. Judd has taken to drinking and hunting on the Preston land, which is especially dangerous because Marty's two younger sisters play there.
Marty's father, Ray (Michael Moriarty), the local mailman, does his best to try to calm down emotions and get along as one has to in a small town. He's a good father and a good listener. But even Ray has his limits of tolerance. "Some people never change, and Judd's one of them," he decides at one point, tired of trying hard to be kind to Judd without receiving any positive response from him.
As the small town's honorable sage, Doc Wallace, Rod Steiger plays a big-hearted character from whom Marty seeks advice on how to deal with Judd. Generally, adults populate the story to provide prepackaged bits of wisdom for Marty to ponder and act upon. "Sometimes you get a streak of bad luck that you can't do anything about, and sometimes you get a streak of bad luck that's your own fault," Doc tells Marty about the troubles Judd has had to face in his life. Judd, he explains, is the product of an abusive father much like Judd himself.
"Truth is always important, but gossip can sometimes be more interesting," Marty's teacher (Dawn McMillan) lectures her students. She tries to show them that even the lowest of the low, like Judd, should be judged only on what they know for sure and certain and have seen with their own eyes. Of course, Marty has personally witnessed how wicked Judd can be, but the teacher's point is a good one nevertheless.
The movie, which plays like a good episode of a television series, is filled with strong moral lessons if not as much action or interest as it needs. (Small but irritating production mistakes mar its presentation. One of the key nighttime scenes, for example, is lit as bright as day.)
Predictable but honest, it just doesn't pack the emotional wallop of the original. Still, for a pleasant family film with likeable characters and a moral message around every corner, SHILOH 2 fills the bill.
SHILOH 2: SHILOH SEASON runs 1:36. It is rated PG for mild thematic elements and would be fine for all ages.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, called it "such a sweet little movie" and gave it *** 1/2. Normally quiet during a movie, he kept speaking up during this one to say how good it was.
