A few days ago screenwriter Steven Phillips (Albert Brooks), the winner of a humanitarian award for his life's work, was on top of the world. Now, a studio executive -- who proudly owns the sofa used in SAVING PRIVATE RYAN -- tells him that he's lost his edge and should be changing careers.
THE MUSE, directed by Brooks and written by Brooks and Monica Johnson, plays like an in-joke to Brooks himself, since he clearly seems to have lost some of his edge in crafting it. A writer and comic who's the best when he's the nastiest, Brooks creates for himself a character that's way too accommodating and sweet.
At its high points, as in its numerous cameos, the movie can be quite funny. Between these islands of laughter, however, lie too many deserts of blandness.
Steven falls back on the custom of turning to someone famous when you need a favor. Since he met Steven Spielberg two decades ago, he tries to set up another meeting with him. After an incredible ordeal, he finally gets a 5-minute audience with Spielberg. His time alone with cinematic royalty doesn't turn out to be quite what he expected. He talks with Steven Spielberg's cousin Stan (Steven Wright), who doesn't do anything other than offer advice about future movies. "Just remember, make it in color," Stan says. "People like color."
In order to rejuvenate his creative juices, Steven decides he is willing to try anything including a crazy idea from his Oscar-winning friend Jack Warrick (Jeff Bridges). Jack suggests Steven give his muse (Sarah) a try.
Unless you've hired one before, you probably have no concept of the enormous cost involved in hiring a muse. Sharon Stone, who normally takes herself way too seriously, plays Sarah with uncharacteristic, child-like playfulness. A world-class spendthrift, Sarah demands a $1,700 a day suite at the Four Seasons Hotel and a refrigerator stocked with special food. She also expects Steven to be constantly at her beck and call as her personal gofer.
Sarah doesn't tell her clients what to do. She just inspires them. Her resume includes being the uncredited creative force behind THE TRUMAN SHOW and THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT. For Steven, she assists him in coming up with a killer idea for a great summer comedy. He proposes having Jim Carrey inherit a troubled aquarium in which the fish die.
After Sarah bonds with Steven's wife, Laura, she starts helping the wife and ignoring the husband. As a would-be Mrs. Fields, Laura is played in an awkward and wooden performance by Andie MacDowell. In a movie that needs more drive, MacDowell functions as the production's black hole, sucking the energy out whenever she appears.
Hollywood's brightest stars drop by to get Sarah's advice or to pay her tribute for past suggestions. We learn that it was because of her that Wolfgang Pung took only 30 seconds to decide it would be goat cheese, and not mozzarella, on his famous pizzas. James Cameron comes knocking at her door wanting advice. "I just don't see you going back to water anytime soon," she counsels him briefly before sending him on his way.
Martin Scorsese has less luck when he comes by seeking her thoughts on his remake of RAGING BULL using a really thin guy. A caffeine-stoked up Scorsese bounces away when she turns out not to be there at the time.
Where is a muse when you need one? Let's hope Albert Brooks locates one before his next film. He's a national treasure who deserves all the muses he needs.
THE MUSE runs 1:37. It is rated PG-13 for brief nudity. It would be fine for kids 9 and up, but they would probably need to be teenagers to enjoy it.
