Let me answer the question that is on the mind of every viewer who has seen writer/director Rand Ravich's THE ASTRONAUT'S WIFE: Is the movie really in slow motion as it appears?
No. But, the zombie-like movements so carefully mastered by the story's leads, Johnny Depp and Charlize Theron, make it seem that the projectionist is running the movie at one-quarter speed.
When we meet the Armacosts, husband Spencer (Depp) is off to his office in space. He's a NASA astronaut who will lose a mysterious 2 minutes while on a space walk. The story, which essentially reveals almost everything from the beginning, makes it obvious that aliens have visited him during this communication blackout.
Spencer's wife, Jillian (Theron), wants some answers when he gets back on earth, but she doesn't get them until months later. At a busy, company cocktail party in New York, where he has gone to accept a lucrative executive position at an aircraft firm, Spencer finally agrees to answer her constant queries about the infamous missing 2 minutes. He pulls her around a corner at the crowded enclave and begins having sex with her as he provides an explanation of sorts. Never does she interrupt him and suggest that he tell her the answers first before engaging in any sexual activity. The scene itself somehow shifts in mid-thrust to their bedroom. The story is rife with many such illogical and implausible happenings.
At least the party does provide an opportunity for some much needed humor in a movie that, given the hackneyed quality of the material, takes itself way too seriously. "I used to be into AIDS," one emaciated socialite tells Jillian. "Now, I'm into hunger."
Shot in shadows with heavy tones of dark wood paneling and deep blues, the film tries its best to look convincing. The script certainly needs all of the help it can get. The film, which is as inert as outer space, uses choral music full of over-the-top creepiness to supply most of the fright factor.
Johnny Depp, in one of his lesser performances, still manages to be the only even partially satisfying aspect to the movie. Charlize Theron, who was so good in a similar role last year in THE DEVIL'S ADVOCATE, talks in constant whispers as if she thinks she's having a religious experience.
Jillian's hairdo? Short like Mia Farrow's. You know, like in ROSEMARY'S BABY. Cute, huh?
Okay, now finish the story yourself. You don't need any more clues.
THE ASTRONAUT'S WIFE runs 1:49. It is rated R for violence, language and a strong scene of sexuality and would be acceptable for teenagers.
