May 14th. For couples deeply in love there is frequently something other than their wedding rings that represents their bond and their undying love. For the Aubracs, it is May 14th. Long along they agreed that for as long as they live, they will be together on that day. May 14 is rapidly approaching, and the resistance fighter husband, Raymond Aubrac (Daniel Auteuil from QUEEN MARGOT), is in jail. His resourceful and loving wife, Lucie (Carole Bouquet from FOR YOUR EYES ONLY), is willing to try anything in an attempt to get him released.
LUCIE AUBRAC, based on a true story, weaves a fascinating tale of the French resistance in World War II that's both an intriguing thriller and a touching love story. Avoiding the clichés and excessive melodrama normally associated with such stories, writer/director Claude Berri creates an intensely moving story full of subtlety and grace.
Focusing on the minutia of the underground collaboration rather than on the grand plans, the movie makes palpable the fear and the intense and unquestioning dedication of each of the freedom fighters. The result is a story that has a freshness and an honesty that allows the viewer to see that era in ways that he probably hasn't before.
The first part of the story contains scenes of the troubling normalcy of the life that many lived. In some ways things hadn't changed even in 1943 Nazi-occupied France in which the picture is set. People go to work, to school, to the tailors and even to the seashore. How hard this must have been with friends, relatives and neighbors being routinely rounded up and shot?
("It's a terrible thing to say, but I can't help being happy," Raymond confesses to his wife during a blissful day with their young son, nicknamed Booboo, at the ocean. He and his wife frolic together in the water while their son digs nearby in the sand. An absolutely perfect day if you could just forget that you might be tortured and killed at any moment.)
As the husband, Daniel Auteuil delivers a warm, compassionate performance as a man who is willing to die for a cause but who'd be much happier holding his wife or playing with his son. With a brow creased by horrific worries, Auteuil, in a delicately nuanced performance, displays the husband's pain and desire. A man who seeks no glory but shirks no obligation, he will do whatever is asked of him.
As the strong wife, Carole Bouquet gives an equally strong performance. With intense, penetrating eyes, she's a woman who accomplishes what she sets out to do regardless of the risks involved. The chemistry between them is genuine, and both avoid numerous opportunities to overact.
LUCIE AUBRAC never manipulates the viewer's emotions, but don't be surprised if you get swept up in the tragedy and the intrigue. Full of tension, the story relies on the small events more than the larger ones to create its excitement. A rewarding movie, it is filled with memorable, sympathetic characters for whom you'll be rooting.
LUCIE AUBRAC runs 1:56. The film is in French with English subtitles. It is rated R for violence and would be fine for teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 8. In the San Jose area it will be playing at one of the Camera Cinemas.
