Every other week of late brings another generic teen comedy to our local movie theaters. With interchangeable plot points and photogenic young actors, most of them share the same remarkable blandness. This week's entry is John Schultz's DRIVE ME CRAZY. Lamer than most, it does manage to rise above the worst of the genre, flicks such as the unbearable JAWBREAKER.
In my generation it was silly surfer movies that the studios put out by the dozens in order to attract those lucrative teen audiences, flush with cash and ready to spring for lots of refreshments at the concession stand. The latest slew of teen movies is no worse than the old surfer ones and no better. Think of them all as representative of a class of movies that are the cinematic equivalent of elevator music. They pass the time and rarely offend.
DRIVE ME CRAZY takes place at a high school about to celebrate its centennial year, which means -- are you sitting down? -- the movie will end in a -- surprise! -- big prom. There have been so many proms this year that one feels underdressed in the theater without a tux or a prom dress.
The story concerns two next-door neighbors, Nicole (Melissa Joan Hart) and Chase (Adrian Grenier), who used to share the same tree house when they were little. Now seniors, they don't like each other anymore.
When Nicole isn't asked to the prom as planned by the school's hottest jock, she asks the disheveled Chase to help her out. If he'll go with her, she suggests she'll treat him to some sex as a reward. To make it look genuine, he'll have to get cleaned up, and they'll have to act like they're an item.
Think they'll end up falling in love for real? Well, duh!
And will there be several scenes of underage drinking and binging? Of course. This movie tries to make it seem more harmless by having one kid, Dave (Mark Webber) be the school's designated driver. He provides free taxi service to all of those too drunk to drive. Poor Dave gets ridiculed for taking such a demeaning job. Being considered a loser, Dave, you can be sure, will eventually be fixed up by the script with a gorgeous girl as his compensation.
The completely predictable and uneventful story ends with a small twist that would have provided a good starting point for a more substantial comedy. But it might have demanded some intelligence on the part of the viewers, something Rob Thomas's significantly underdeveloped script avoids like the plague.
This much can be said. Even if their acting in this movie isn't much, Hart and Grenier seem to be having a good time. Too bad the same can't be said of most of the audience.
DRIVE ME CRAZY runs 1:34. It is rated PG-13 for teen alcohol and drug use and for language. It would be acceptable for most teenagers.
