When a film sinks to the level of making jokes about pedophilic rape, you know it's in big trouble. HARD, directed by John Huckert and written by the director and John Matkowsky, is a disgusting movie whose only possible saving grace is that it's sometimes laughably bad, if you get over the disgusting, gratuitous violence. There was some laughter at our screening, but the most frequent expression heard afterwards is that you felt like you needed to take a bath, it was so repulsive.
This movie could be exhibit A in what's wrong with many indie films. The acting and writing have all the sophistication expected from a first year student at a junior college. To compensate, one suspects, for the lameness of the production, the director layers on a pornographic level of violence and sadism. If the movie can't be interesting, it will at least try to shock us into appreciating it.
Jack, a gay serial killer of other gays, is played by Malcolm Moorman in the only almost passable performance in the picture. Noel Palomaria plays new promoted Detective Raymond Vates, an in-the-closet gay. His eventual coming out makes for the least believable part of a ridiculous story. As the wise, older Detective Tom Ellis, Charles Lanyer is Raymond's partner.
Most of the disgusting scenes are indescribable. One, for example, features a prostitute whose nickname is Lockjaw and who suffers from epileptic fits. You can probably guess out where the writers are going with that setup.
The movie works only if you assume it's a parody, but few scenes are intentionally funny. Most are so sickening that you'll be looking for plenty of opportunities to visit the concession stand and the restroom -- anything to get away from the movie.
Then there's the dialog. "I've spent more time here washing out my jockey strap than you have being a detective," Tom tells Raymond so as to put him in his place.
Another choice selection of lines occurs after the second murder. "You thinkin' what I'm thinkin'?" Raymond asks. "What are you thinking?" Tom replies. "Serial," Raymond says taciturnly. "Need three to make it serial," Tom corrects him. End of scene.
Jack, who knows within a nanosecond whether a guy is gay or not, comes on to Raymond. "You're inclined; I'm inclined," Jack tells Raymond after Jack has lured him to a bar late one night. "We're a cut above the rest."
When Raymond does admit his sexual preference, the treatment he receives from his fellow officers is horrific. Among other things, they'd rather see him and his partner die than show up when backup is formally requested. The cops' actions are as shameless as the movie itself.
HARD runs a long 1:42. It is not rated but would be NC-17 for strong, graphic violence, rape, torture, nudity and language. It is not acceptable for teenagers.
