When a director like Wes Craven, who has built his career on horror flicks, wants to find something different for a change of pace, what does he pick? How about a script from Pamela Gray about teaching violin to Harlem students -- a story "inspired" by a documentary, as the credits claim?
You might expect an edgy movie, full of surprises. If you do, you'd be wrong. MUSIC OF THE HEART is MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS dumbed down and clichéd up. Even if the subject it chronicles is worthy, the film about it is so hopelessly saccharine that watching it may induce sugar overload.
The film stars Meryl Streep as divorced, single mother of two, Roberta Guaspari, a long time substitute teacher who establishes what becomes a wildly successful violin program for inner city kids. The schmaltzy script that Streep has to work from is beneath her, but, like the trooper she is, she gives it her all.
The well disciplined children have such nice manners that you'll find it hard to believe that they live in a ghetto. Roberta is a miracle worker. One minute her students are screeching away on their violins, and the next they're making melodious music at a concert.
The scenes are set up for maximum emotional effect. Roberta teaches her kids, for example, that standing tall and firm is part of the musical training regiment. She pushes one girl over only to realize that she wears leg braces. In another incident she reproves a girl for being late to class. When Roberta probes for the reason, she finds that the girl's grandmother has been mugged. When Roberta inquires whether her grandmother is okay now, the girl explains that she is dead. Raise the melancholy background music up high and cut. Impact made.
Surprisingly, half of the movie concerns not the music program but Roberta's family and social life. Her two boys put an ad in the personals to find her a date. They even bet on whether her first date will kiss her or not.
The film's saving grace is a rousing, star-studded ending that is the musical equivalent of the big game. It is completely satisfying even if the level of the kids' playing isn't quite believable. The satisfying conclusion does not, however, make up for the all the time waiting for it.
MUSIC OF THE HEART runs too long at 2:04. It is rated PG for language and would be fine for kids of any age, but those younger than teenagers are likely to be bored.
