Where does obnoxiousness end and comedic talent begin?
Andy Kaufman's performances constantly raised that question, and so does Milos Forman's movie about Andy's life, MAN ON THE MOON. Starring Jim Carrey as Kaufman as well as Andy's alter ego, Tony Clifton, the movie tests the limits of the viewers' patience just as Andy did. The frequently funny result is as much a curiosity piece as a traditional motion picture. But one fact is undeniable, Carrey is terrific in the role and might finally earn the Oscar nomination that he so richly deserved, but didn't get, last year for THE TRUMAN SHOW. Then again, Hollywood has never really warmed up to Carrey's acting talent, so don't bet on any nominations.
The script by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski has the movie start with the closing credits. Yes, you read that right, the closing, not the opening credits. One problem with the script, however, is that this turns out to be the highlight of the entire show. It never again reaches this level of imagination and joy. Just as Andy generated a mixture of reactions from his audience from grimaces to nervous laughter, the movie produces those same reactions. Still, even at its most unpleasant, the movie features Carrey's talent, which never ceases to dazzle and amaze.
"I'm not a comic," Andy honestly tells his future agent George Shapiro (Danny DeVito). "I don't even do jokes. I don't know what's funny." He does know success. And to Andy, success consists of so riling up his audience that half of them walk out in disgust. He'll do anything to get under their skins -- reading "The Great Gatsby" aloud to college audiences, insulting patrons at nightclubs by telling them how fat they look and ridiculing females who he eggs on to wrestle him.
George thinks Andy may be his diamond in the rough. "You're insane, but you might also be brilliant," he tells his new client, who proceeds to give George the fake snot that he has had hanging out of his nose, telling George to save it since it may one day be valuable.
Paul Giamatti plays Andy's writer and comedic partner, Bob Zmuda, and Courtney Love plays Andy's girlfriend, Lynne Margulies. Lynne meets Andy in a wrestling match on "The Merv Griffith Show." It's not often that a romantic relationship starts with a fight.
Perhaps the most honest line is uttered by a television executive. When shown the tape that Andy wants to be his big TV special, the executive looks at it in total disbelief, saying the obvious, "This is not funny!"
"You're like some stupid kid who comes home and says, 'Look Dad, I got an F'," George tells Andy, as Andy's career goes down the drain. Andy, of course, has mixed reactions to his lack of popularity, which to him may be some crazy measure of success. Enjoying a movie in which bad is supposed to be good is at best problematic, but Carrey manages to make it strangely compelling.
It's always hard to figure out whether someone will like a movie, but the recommendation on this one is easy. If you've seen the trailers, you've already seen the movie. The full-length version just fills in some details. If you liked the trailers, you'll probably like the film. And if you didn't think much of the trailers, well, save your money.
MAN ON THE MOON runs 1:50. It is rated R for language and would be fine for teenagers.
