When Disney released the original FANTASIA in 1940, they envisioned it to be a "perpetual work in progress," with a new version coming out regularly, something that has never happened until now. For the movie's 60th anniversary, Disney has devised an almost all-new film; only Mickey's famous "Sorcerer's Apprentice" segment remains.
FANTASIA, perhaps cinema's most beloved musical montage, has not merely been updated. It has an entirely new medium for its latest incarnation. Disney decided that they would shoot it in IMAX, a format normally reserved for films in which the viewers vicariously risk their lives climbing mountains (EVEREST) or riding roller coasters (THRILL RIDE).
The resulting film, FANTASIA/2000, is a real treat for the ears. As classical music from "The Pines of Rome" to "The Pomp and Circumstance March" booms out of the theater's monster speakers, one has to be in awe.
It is in the visuals that the movie comes up so short that it has to be labeled a disappointment. Given the three-dimensional realism that we've seen this past year from Disney (TARZAN), Pixar/Disney (TOY STORY 2) and other studios (THE PRINCESS MONONOKE), most of the illustrations in FANTASIA/2000 look flat and uninviting by comparison.
Then there is the choice of IMAX as the medium, which might seem a cute idea but turns out to be a fundamental mistake. Blown up several stories high, the animation's flaws are magnified. What should be compelling instead turns out to be too busy and garish as gigantic images flash across the screen.
Mickey's segment, especially, suffers by being stretched. Why they didn't repaint the colors is a mystery because it leaves this episode looking needlessly dated due to its grainy texture. When it ends, they cut to a properly colored Mickey, which just emphasizes the inadequate restoration of the original portion.
FANTASIA/2000 isn't a bad movie, just one with so much potential that it causes you to dwell on its flaws. Take the whale sequence. As these beautiful animals frolic and splash in the ocean, the director decided not to include any sound effects. Normally such a scene would have had some realistic water sounds overlaid with the music. Without them, the piece has a strangely remote and detached feeling.
Go in with low expectations, try not to be too demanding when it comes to the animation and FANTASIA/2000 will prove a pleasant enough experience. Just try to forget how good it could and should have been.
FANTASIA/2000 runs 1:15. It is rated G and would be fine for all ages, although many kids will be bored as there is little plot to hold their attention.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, liked the movie enough to give it ** 1/2. It was so different for him that he didn't know quite what to make of it or how to rate it. He liked most of the segments, except the ending one, which he found too fast and confusing.
