Atmospherics trump story in EYE OF THE BEHOLDER, starring Ashley Judd in a hodgepodge of silly wigs. Writer/director Stephan Elliott (THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT), who appears to have studied at the Oliver Stone School of Theatrics, devotes all of his energy to the picture's look, leaving no time for storytelling. The resulting mess is a muddled and befuddled film that makes Judd's last picture, the critically derided DOUBLE JEOPARDY, look like a cinematic masterpiece in comparison.
Pulling out all of the tired, old clichés and trying to invent a few new ones, Elliott gives us an ant's-eye view of walking feet in one scene and lots of flashing lightning in another. His staging choices never consider issues of plausibility. Would-be undercover cops keep going in tandem to a crowded diner but never remove their sunglasses indoors. And big plate glass windows attract naked fornicators like flies to honey.
As the boyish snoop known as The Eye, Ewan McGregor (THE PHANTOM MENACE) gives a dense and impenetrable performance. Actually none of the cast manage anything approaching a decent performance. Given Elliott's bizarre direction, maybe the actors shouldn't be criticized too harshly. Still, if you are one of their fans, you'll be grimacing a lot.
Joanna (Judd) is a serial killer. The Eye, who works for a secretive -- is there any other? -- government agency, is trailing her using a variety of technical gadgets. His weapon of choice is a rifle with a hunting scope and a super-sensitive listening device. It also fires bullets when necessary. The Eye is accompanied by his missing daughter, who may or may not be dead. They have long conversations, not that you'll care.
The illogical and choppy script reminds one of a story told by a rambling first-grade student. Sometimes The Eye seems to be trying to stop Joanna, sometimes he seems to be falling in love with her and at other times he acts likes a compulsive voyeur who just can't stop staring.
Some movies are frustrating because you can't figure out where they are heading. EYE OF THE BEHOLDER is even more infuriating because you realize that, not only do you have no idea where it's going, you don't even care.
Are there any interesting parts to this putative thriller? I counted two. Once, when I closed my eyes, which I should have done more often, I realized how nice the music was when the ridiculousness of the visuals didn't intrude. The other, a bit of eye candy, occurs during a bath scene at a hotel. As Joanna lies naked in a bubble bath, The Eye fondles the smooth tile on the other side of the wall in his room. For Judd's many adoring male fans, the scene provides an apt metaphor for their perpetually unrequited love.
EYE OF THE BEHOLDER runs 1:47. It is rated R for some strong violence, sexuality, language and brief drug content. The picture would be acceptable only for older teenagers.
