In Disney's THE TIGGER MOVIE, Tigger is busily searching for a tree, but not just any tree. Hoping to be united with other tiggers, he's looking high and low in the Hundred Acre Wood in hopes of discovering his family tree.
In a world in which every kid's movie works hard to morph into a full-fledged family movie by blending Woody Allen adult humor with STAR WARS special effects, THE TIGGER MOVIE is a delightful throwback to a simpler time -- a time when every kid's movie didn't feel obligated to throw in vague sexual innuendoes and transparent bathroom humor and a time when the animation didn't look like it was prepared on computers sophisticated enough for nuclear weapons simulation.
This charming little picture, based on the beloved A. A. Milne children's books, sets itself a modest goal of entertaining a crowded room full of squirming youngsters and attains it admirably. (Actually, just keeping a bunch of little kids in their seats with their eyes transfixed to the screen is probably rather an ambitious goal, as any parent can attest.) The more amazing part of the simple story is the pleasant effect that it has on the adults. Without a single line that they can call their own, the old fogies in the audience will find themselves just as touched by these wonderfully sweet characters.
Granted, not a lot happens in the movie, but the drawings are handsome and the characters compelling and lively. Tigger, voiced by Jim Cummings, who also does the voice of Winnie the Pooh, does what tiggers do best, which is lots of bouncing. A high-spirited and good-spirited character, Tigger is a character who deserves his own movie.
Tigger's a funny guy who says some of his precious old lines ("TTFN: Ta-Ta For Now.") and some new ones. Among the latter, a particularly good example has Tigger describing his little buddy Roo as "lacking in the perpendicular."
The gorgeous animation uses picture book images rather than realism in the drawing. This gives the movie a lush look that reminds you of illustrated books from your childhood. The movie sometimes comes back to the book itself and lets the drawings on the pages come alive.
Among the show's other delights is a song-and-dance dream sequence featuring rows of tiggers performing in everything from chorus lines to synchronized swimming.
The message of the film is an old-fashioned one lifted straight out of the WIZARD OF OZ: There's no place like home. Tigger realizes that his friends are his family. Like the rest of the movie, it's a sweet and simple theme, which is delivered with understated delicacy.
THE TIGGER MOVIE runs just 1:16. It is rated G and has nothing to offend or frighten anyone of any age.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, gave the film *** and remarked that it would be great for all ages. He couldn't think of anything he didn't like about it. His cousin William, age 5, loved the picture, giving it ****. His favorite part was when the avalanche hit. William's sister, Liana, age 3, doesn't talk much. At her first theatrical movie, she was clearly fascinated. On the edge of her seat through most of the picture, she stared in big-eyed delight at it.
