Edward Norton (FIGHT CLUB), one of the most gifted actors today, shows that he is just as talented behind the camera as in front of it in his directorial debut with KEEPING THE FAITH, a film in which he stars along with Ben Stiller (THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY) and Jenna Elfman (EDTV and "Dharma & Greg").
Most actors, even some of the best ones, play essentially the same character in every movie. Edward Norton is a true acting chameleon who becomes completely different people in every part he plays.
In KEEPING THE FAITH, Norton plays Father Brian Finn, a sweet and innocent Catholic priest with a pixyish grin. Ben Stiller plays Rabbi Jacob Schram. The two of them are affectionately referred to as "The God Squad." They are a lovable duo who pack their respective church and synagogue with enthusiastic worshipers.
Jenna Elfman plays Anna Reilly, a 100-hour-per-week, workaholic management consultant, who says God could have made the world in just 3 days if he had gotten her help. The 3 of them were best buddies until Anna moved away from New York City in the eighth grade. The story concerns their reuniting when she comes to The Big Apple to work on temporary assignment. It is at a time in Jacob's life when the elders of his congregation want him to find a good Jewish woman, something Anna isn't, to marry.
In a cinematic era in which cynicism rules, KEEPING THE FAITH is that rarest of movies that celebrate the importance and the joys of faith and religion. And at a time in which dysfunctionalism is ever-present in pictures, KEEPING THE FAITH shows the unbounded happiness of a good romance.
Although the three of them resume their friendship as adult buddies, their relationship quickly moves beyond that stage. And, when Jacob and Anna fall in love, it gets complicated fast, especially since they decide it would be better not to hurt Brian's feelings by telling him.
The script is quite funny, and there isn't a false moment in the movie. Among the wonderful supporting cast is: Anne Bancroft as Jacob's Jewish mother, Milos Forman as a wise older priest and Eli Wallach as an older rabbi with big heart and an open mind. Set in New York City, the movie is filmed beautifully, and the city's skyscrapers have never looked lovelier.
The picture's only failing is that Norton makes the mistake of many first-time directors and falls too much in love with his work, letting some scenes meander when they should have been crisper.
The joy of KEEPING THE FAITH is contagious. This feel-good movie is a real charmer with great romantic chemistry among the leads. It makes you feel happy to be alive.
KEEPING THE FAITH runs 2:05. It is rated PG-13 for some sexuality and language and would be fine for kids around 11 and up.
My son Jeffrey, almost 11, loved the movie, giving it a full ****. He said that it was really funny and that his favorite part was when they were all in the eighth grade.
