One of the turning points in World War II came when we captured a German Enigma coding machine. This device, the Germans believed, made their codes uncrackable. Once we had the machine without the German's knowledge, we were able to break their codes without their being the wiser. By being able to read the German's secret orders to their subs, we were finally able to win the Battle of the Atlantic, thus allowing us to supply our troops in Europe.
U-571 tells a stirring tale of submarine warfare, inspired by these true events. Even though the picture may be criticized for being a fictionalized composite of various events, it's probably closer to the truth than many films that claim to be true stories. Regardless of this, it is most certainly an exhilarating and satisfying thriller that will have you on the edge of your seat once the battles begin.
The movie's only serious flaw is that director Jonathan Mostow (BREAKDOWN), who shares the writing credits with Sam Montgomery and David Ayer, lets his movie drift at first as he takes too long setting up the plot. But, after the movie finds its sea legs, you won't have time to catch your breath in this first action movie of the summer. (Okay, I know it's only spring, but this film, with it's realistic battle sequences, is a big budget, summer thriller even if it arrives in port a bit early.)
The plan is to outfit an American sub and crew to look German. This boat will rendezvous with a stranded German sub, and before they know what hit them, the Americans will storm the sub and steal their Enigma. They will then scuttle the German sub so that the Germans don't know that we have their translating machine. This simple plan goes seriously awry, setting up a wonderful, classic war sequence that takes place mainly underwater in a sub as it is being attacked. The tension is palpable, causing your adrenaline to pump like crazy.
As Captain Dahlgren, Bill Paxton gives the movie's only wooden performance, arguably because of his stilted dialog. ("Relax Gentlemen, she's old but she'll hold," he reassures the others about their fake German sub.) His XO is played by the film's star, Matthew McConaughey, who turns in one of his most convincing pieces of acting, eschewing his tendency to superciliousness (AMISTAD, for example). Harvey Keitel plays the wise old Chief who guides his XO on how best to command.
The rest of the ensemble cast (Jon Bon Jovi, Jake Weber, Erik Palladino, Matthew Settle, David Keith, T.C. Carson, Derk Cheetwood, Will Estes, Tom Guiry, Jack Noseworthy and Dave Power) work as well together as a crew would at sea.
If there is one part of the movie that best captures the film's essence, it is the realistically frightening depth charge scenes. Imagine being a couple of hundred feet under water as the enemy above you drops drum after drum of explosives at you. An imaginative captain can help, but basically you have to wait and pray that they will miss you.
One of the few unabashedly patriotic movies in some time, U-571 pays homage to our brave soldiers who fought and died in a world at war. And it lets you vicariously feel some of their trauma as they wonder if each moment will be their last.
U-571 runs 1:56. It is rated PG-13 for war violence and would be fine for kids around 12 and up.
