What if you had an opportunity to talk to your dead father as he was 30 years ago? What would you say?
This opportunity of a lifetime may never be yours, but it is John Sullivan's (James Caviezel) in FREQUENCY. He happens to tap into his dad's frequency on a ham radio across a massive sun spot. Shocked and disbelieving at first, they eventually realize that they are talking to each other across 30 years.
This event fortuitously occurs just two days before his dad, Frank (Dennis Quaid), died, so John tries to make the most of it. But, following the law of unintended consequences, the actions that John and Frank take end up altering history in ways both good and bad. Worse than messing with Mother Nature is fooling around with the time-space continuum, even if it is for such a laudable purpose as trying to save your father's life.
In a lesser director's hands, this movie could easily have dissolved into schmaltz or a cheap sci-fi flick. Director Gregory Hoblit (FALLEN and PRIMAL FEAR), aided again by David Rosenbloom's perfectly timed editing, delivers a thriller that keeps you on the edge of your seat and a heart-warming father-son story that comes along as a wonderful bonus.
The effects of modifying the past are ingeniously explored by the wonderfully complex and satisfying script of first-time writer Toby Emmerich. Toby's brother, actor Noah Emmerich (Truman's best friend in THE TRUMAN SHOW), plays John's best buddy, Gordo. The tightly-written script contains twist upon twist, and its potential holes appear to be thoroughly plugged. The intense film works more for the writing and the directing than the acting, although the actors are more than adequate.
Among the examples of the script's ingenuity is the way that the shared desk is used to communicate across time. Since both father and son have the same ham radio on the same desk, burns and cuts on the desk are used to advance key sections of the storyline. In one incident, the dad carves a message to the son, who sees it in the future.
This is, however, the type of film that may disappoint some viewers. When the father honestly expresses love for his son, and his son says how much he misses him, a large section of our audience broke into catcalls. They liked the action-thriller parts -- including some impressive fires and explosions -- but somehow couldn't deal with sincere expressions of love between a father and a son. Personally, I was close to tears.
FREQUENCY can legitimately be called a good-spirited thriller, a category that barely exists. It is also sometimes funny with one of the best parts concerning a stock recommendation.
The intriguing story holds your attention from start to finish. With characters worth caring about and a mesmerizing plot, the movie is thoroughly entertaining and intelligent to boot. And like many a movie, it isn't the saccharinely silly story that the movie's trailers might lead you to believe. This is an intense and fast-paced film that sometimes literally takes your breath away.
FREQUENCY runs 1:56. It is rated PG-13 for intense violence and disturbing images and would not be appropriate for those under 13.
