A 1940s-style melodrama but WITH COLOR.
UP AT THE VILLA, based on a Somerset Maugham novella, is set in a remarkably benign Fascist Italy on the brink of World War II. The movie unfolds like a dream with model-quality characters slowly drifting through the sumptuous sets. As directed by Philip Haas and scripted and edited by his wife Belinda, who worked together on ANGELS AND INSECTS, the movie induces an almost trance-like state in the audience. Containing a small drama wrapped in a light-weight romance, the story moves on gossamer wings, never boring and yet never quite compelling. A lovely, moving tableaux, it's almost sad the way the picture never quite obtains lift-off.
A regal and radiant Kristin Scott Thomas (RANDOM HEARTS) and a dashing and handsome Sean Penn (SWEET AND LOWDOWN) play lovers with some similarities to the parts that they played in their last pictures. As Mary Panton, Scott Thomas is a poor widow who lives an expensive lifestyle due to the generosity of her friends. After being foolish enough to love her last husband, who drank himself to death while squandering their money, she has resolved not to make that mistake again.
Soon after the story opens, an older but wealthy man, Sir Edgar Swift (James Fox), proposes marriage to Mary. She doesn't love him, which she views as an attribute since that guarantees that he can't break her heart.
Mary's friend, known as the Princess (Anne Bancroft), advises her to marry but take lovers as she has. The Princess says that her husband is "ugly enough to frighten the horses," but that's not a problem since he has given her wealth and freedom.
Of course, as was mandatory in the old 1940s melodramas, some cad has to show up to complicate the situation. Sean Penn plays reputed scoundrel Rowley Flint, a married man with an unsavory reputation. The biggest problem with the screenplay is that it makes Rowley into a lovable pussycat. Possibly the sweetest character in the film, save Mary, Rowley acts with the sincerity of a saint even if he is described as "wild and reckless."
Scott Thomas and Penn do everything asked of them, but it just isn't quite enough to make this quaint little story into much of a movie. Still, if you're in need of some tranquility and rest, you could do worse than park your weary bones in a theater that's playing UP AT THE VILLA. And, if you do nod off every now and then, not to worry -- you won't miss anything important. You'll leave the theater feeling rested and peaceful, not something that can be said about the effect of most movies.
UP AT THE VILLA runs a bit long at 1:55. It is rated PG-13 for some sexuality and violence and would be acceptable for those 11 and up. There is, however, little to hold the interest of most kids.
