THE BIG KAHUNA is about a lot of things, including God, friendship and industrial lubricants. In short, it's about the meaning of life as seen from the perspective of two mid-Western, veteran, industrial lubricant salesmen (Kevin Spacey and Danny DeVito) and a fresh young kid from research (Peter Facinelli) in town together for a convention.
As directed by John Swanbeck and written by Roger Rueff, based on his play, THE BIG KAHUNA will immediately remind you of GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS, adapted by David Mamet from his own play. Although not as good or as raunchy the Mamet film/play, THE BIG KAHUNA is no less ambitious. Sometimes seeming to bite off more than it can chew, the film dares to ask many questions but provide few answers.
What it does most successfully is showcase Spacey and DeVito's acting talents. Getting the flashiest role, Spacey, the grand master of the art of sarcasm, plays Larry Mann, a salesman who is petrified that they may not have a grand-enough hospitality suite to lure in "El Kahuna Grande," their biggest potential client ever. The quality of their hors d'oeuvres also troubles him.
With the meatiest part, DeVito plays Phil Cooper, a recently divorced man who pensively ponders what he really wants to do with his life. Although his good friend Larry knows that success means making the big sale, a tired and weary Phil isn't sure anymore about anything. "You take guys away from their wives for any length of time, and they don't know how to behave," Phil says, supposedly talking about the other conventioneers but probably talking more about himself now that he is wifeless.
Bob (Facinelli) is the most unusual of the characters and the hardest to peg. He is an All-American-boy type, who wears his faithfulness to his wife on his sleeve. Appearing to be some sort of born-again Christian, he feels that it's his obligation to turn conversations, including those with customers, toward his Lord. The story, which takes no religious sides, makes his character the most intriguing and the biggest enigma. One could easily read into his character that he represents salvation, but there are other possible interpretations.
"You ought to apply for sainthood, Bob," Larry tells him, mockingly uncomfortable with Bob's faith. "Competition isn't as stiff as it used to be." A likable cynic, Larry loves to taunt Bob and ridicule religion in general. "You don't smoke," Larry says to Phil. "I don't drink. And Bob here doesn't lust after women. Between the three of us here, we're practically Jesus!"
Basically a filmed play, the movie happens almost entirely in a single room, which is both a blessing and a curse. Although it can be claustrophobic, this approach focuses our attention on the acting and the script and away from such diversions as supporting characters, props, camerawork and all of the other trappings of traditional motion pictures. Most films would quickly become stuffy with this limiting approach, but it is a tribute to the sharpness of the acting and the dialog that THE BIG KAHUNA rarely does. In fact, it is only when the director tries to open up the play just a bit by including a few brief dream sequences that the movie goes seriously awry.
A hard-core non-believer, Larry resists attempts to suggest that life has a bigger purpose than closing the next big sale. In one of the movie's best interchanges, Phil suggests certain possibilities to Larry. "Strange things happen," Phil tells him in summation. "No they don't, not unless they're printed in USA TODAY first."
THE BIG KAHUNA runs a fast 1:30. It is rated R for language and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
