"Welcome to the lives of the rich and tasteless," Bobby (Nathan Bexton) tells Adrien (Lori Heuring) as she enters her first party hosted by members of "The Club." The club is an exclusive beach and sports facility where wealthy kids, not currently in rehab, like to play and party.
Actually, "the rich and boring" would be more apropos. Tasteless would have been a decided improvement.
THE IN CROWD, lamely directed by Mary Lambert from a vapid script by Mark Gibson and Philip Halprin, isn't the teen comedy that you might expect. It is a ploddingly plotted thriller that moves slowly in creaks and groans. So devoid of energy, the movie will have audiences calling out suggestions for the characters. In ours, some of the audience's catcalls would have been an improvement. To be fair, almost any change would have been an improvement. It is easy to see why the movie wasn't screened in advance to critics.
The title refers to Adrien's lack of status since she isn't one of "the in crowd." Recently released from a mental institution -- where she was placed somewhat capriciously -- she is effectively on parole to work at the club. If she gets fired, it is back to the hospital for her. She will, of course, prove to be just about the sanest person in the story.
As the lead princess, Brittany (Susan Ward) sets her eyes on Adrien and fakes a suicide just so that she can get some mouth-to-mouth action from her. Closet lesbianism is one of the movie's few subplots.
The superwealthy, we find, have incredible bodies -- with waists the size of small tree limbs, tans over every millimeter of their skin and, in the case of the girls, prominent breasts. It is amazing what money will do for you. Brains and manners, however, don't seem to come with riches.
People will die, but you will not care. People will be falsely accused, and, again, you will be completely indifferent, as there isn't a genuine moment in the story.
The movie does ask two important questions. Does excessive use of lip gloss lead to deviant behavior, and what is the proper gift for a recent rehab graduate? The answers are yes and a brand new Hummer.
THE IN CROWD runs a long 1:40. It is rated PG-13 for violence, sexuality, language, drug content and brief nudity and would acceptable for most teenagers.
