"You've got so many great books," remarks Julie (Dana Goodman), a woman Dex (Donal Logue) has just met. "All the better to seduce you with," replies the rotund but irresistible Dex. "What?" asks Julie. "All the better to deduce the truth with," he claims.
In the easiest film to enjoy this summer, Jenniphr Goodman's good-spirited THE TAO OF STEVE tells the story of a lovable philosopher who attracts women like honey even if he's way too big for his own good. The versatile Donal Logue (THE PATRIOT), who seems to show up in a supporting role in most movies lately, gets a rare starring role this time and makes the most of it. Oozing charm from every pore, the sweet Dex is a chatterbox philosopher with a purpose -- picking up chicks.
Dex quotes many philosophers, but his allegiance is to the Tao of Steve. ("Steve isn't just a name, it's a state of mind. It's a way of living," we're told.) You know, the famous Steves of history, including Steve McGarrett ("Hawaii Five-O"), Steve Austin ("The Six Million Dollar Man") and, most of all, Steve McQueen. Being a Steve myself, I, of course, know these things, but I'll explain them to you in case you don't. The fundamental principle in this philosophy is, "We pursue that which retreats from us." This means, Dex explains to his friend Dave (Kimo Wills), that the way to get laid is to put it furthest from your mind when on a date.
The problem is that the first woman Dex really falls hard for, Syd, appears completely immune to his techniques. Syd, one of the most genuine characters you're likely to see in the cinema, is played by Greer Goodman with the organic good looks of someone you might meet at a health food store. She has a philosophy too -- "Just say no to nudity." -- that meshes exactly with Dex's, who is embarrassed by his body's superfluous 100 pounds, which he jokes is more like 200 extra.
Generally, however, Dex and Syd's chemistry together is great, albeit generally negative. When Syd finds out that he's been seeing another woman while unsuccessfully pursuing her, she is upset. "Am I supposed to remain celibate while I bask in the warm glow of your annihilating contempt?" he asks tartly. The bright script by Greer Goodman, Jenniphr Goodman and Duncan North literally bursts with such gems.
Dex has a glib response for every question, which drives Syd crazy. "What do you look for in a woman," Syd asks Dex seriously. "Low standards," he snaps back.
Syd, who way back in their college days knew Dex in the biblical sense, can't understand why the smartest kid in class ended up so poorly. With no ambition, little money, and a part-time job as a fun-loving kindergarten teacher, he is completely at peace with his complete lack of what goes for success. "Doing stuff is overrated," Dex tells Syd, and then goes on to point out how much better the world would be if Hitler had been more laid-back.
To be fair, Dex has thoughts on more subjects than sexual pursuits. He complains, for example, that people only talk to God when they want something. Why, he asks Syd, don't people ask him, "Hey, God. How was your day?"
The formulaic plot ends up exactly in the satisfying way that you would expect, but you'd be disappointed if it didn't. One of the funniest parts of the movie may be missed by moviegoers who have never gone back to one of their school's reunions. At Dex's class's 10th, which opens the movie, he is the only one who has gained weight. The rest of the group are so trim that they could all be aerobics instructors. Real reunions are celebrations of fat over fitness. Anyone who hasn't gained weight stands out like a sore thumb. Trust me. I know. I came back a 100 pounds lighter. My ex-schoolmates looked at me like they figured that I had contracted an emaciating and soon-to-be-fatal disease.
THE TAO OF STEVE runs a fast 1:28. It is rated R for language and some drug use and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
