In Takao Okawara's GODZILLA 2000, Godzilla may have met his match in something that looks like a flying piece of fossilized dino dung in the shape of the Millennium Falcon. But since this is the 23rd Japanese film about Godzilla, the smart money is on Godzilla to win again.
When we first see Godzilla in his millennium edition, he is on his usual power trip, knocking over electrical lines left and right. After noshing on metal delicacies like ships and bridges, he is ready to fight all comers. The Japanese army has developed a special metal piercing missile that they figure is certain to take down their old nemesis, but the bombs aren't even strong enough to give the thick-skinned monster a case of heartburn.
Yes sirree, after being bored with Roland Emmerich's GODZILLA, prepared with zillions of dollars' worth of computer generated images, we are back to basics with this Japanese version of a guy in a rubber suit. The English dubbing is so unsynchronized that it appears that they intended it to mismatch as another way to generate laughs.
When our two mega-villains square off in the obligatory, ending battle to the death, their weapons of choice are classic. Against Godzilla's dinosaur breath, his competition resorts to the evil eye.
The biggest problem with GODZILLA 2000 is that it is just not cheesy enough. And we waste a lot of time waiting for Godzilla to get back on stage. How many breaks does a man in a rubber suit need?
Although the humans in the story mainly hang around gawking or shooting at the monster, sometimes their hokey dialog does add some zest to the story's campy ambiance. "Are you sure you've still got film in the camera?" asks scientist Yuji Shinoda (Takehiro Murata) to his female companion, as they are hot on Godzilla's trail. "Oh, bite me!" she shoots back.
The problem with GODZILLA 2000 is that, like wasabi, a little goes a long way. Thirty minutes would have been plenty for me.
GODZILLA 2000 runs 1:30. It is rated PG for monster violence and mild language and would be fine for most kids. Children under 5 might be frightened by the silly looking monsters, but none of the kids in our audience appeared to be the least bit upset.
My son Jeffrey and his friend Nickolas, both 11, gave the movie ***. They thought it was funny, and both liked the space ship best. They did wish that some of Godzilla's old rivals would have made an appearance.
