Alex (William H. Macy) is a depressed, middle-aged, middle class guy who works two jobs. In the first, working out of his home, he sells "lawn ornaments, kitchen gewgaws and sexual aids." But it is his second job, working for his father, Michael (Donald Sutherland), which concerns us. Simply put, Alex is a hit man, a contract killer, a cold-blooded murderer.
PANIC, by writer/director Henry Bromell, is a crisp tale rather like a short story. The black comedy has a smart, subtle wit and is filmed in melancholic shades of blues and greens. A character study of middle-aged angst, the movie could not have had a better lead than by Macy. With his troubled brow and his handsome, big, soulful eyes, he speaks volumes without even opening his mouth. He could be the poster boy for middle-aged men everywhere. Giving another of his empathetic performances, he makes his character's pain visceral. Alex is one lost, depressed guy, and his job is perhaps the least of his problems.
In contrast to his emotionally volatile father, Alex never loses his temper. At home, Alex has an inquisitive, precocious and borderline obnoxious 6-year-old boy, Sammy (David Dorfman), and a self-described "jealous housewife," Martha (Tracey Ullman). He goes through the motions with them, but his mind is lost in the fog.
Alex, after years of bottling up his anger and his crushing sadness, goes to seek the advice of a shrink, Dr. Parks (John Ritter). At Dr. Parks's office, he finally discovers hope -- no, not from the doctor but from a 23-year-old patient, Sarah (Neve Campbell), whom he meets in the waiting room.
Where, if anywhere, Alex and Sarah's relationship will go isn't clear. Whether it will ever even evolve past awkward, polite conversation isn't at all certain. Like the rest of the story, their chemistry is sad, sweet and poignant. Sarah is wise beyond her years, fairly amoral and emotionally disturbed. As in many short stories, most of her character stays an enigma. One thing is obvious -- Alex cannot get her out of his mind.
We learn more about some of the underlying causes of Alex's mental problems. "Every man has a destiny, Alex. The trick is in discovering it," his father tells him at age 6, as he is being shown his destiny, or at least the one that his father has in mind for him.
Touching, sad and sometimes funny, PANIC is the story of Alex's rebellion at what has become his destiny. The movie's biggest surprise is that with an excellent cast, superb acting and an intriguing story, almost no one has seen it, since it is getting an absolutely minimal theatrical release. With all of the insipid films that get released every week, it is a shame that one with this much merit is being ignored.
PANIC runs a fast 1:30. It is rated R for language and elements of violence and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
