The plot for Victor Sarin's LEFT BEHIND: THE MOVIE involves nothing less than world peace, world government, world currency and the world's food supply. And these are just the minor issues.
As it opens, GNN reporter Buck Williams (Kirk Cameron) breaks the story of unknown forces from all over the world staging massive air-strikes on Israel, but the confusing script quickly discards this subplot. Based on the first of a series of best selling novels by Jerry B. Jenkins and Tim LaHaye, the story is really about the end of the world as we know it after the chosen few, actually the chosen 142 million -- plus or minus a few souls -- have ascended into heaven.
Neither as bad you might fear nor as good as you might hope -- see THE RAPTURE for a successful picture with similar themes -- LEFT BEHIND: THE MOVIE alternately intrigues and baffles the viewers. Sometimes watching it makes you think that you need a secret decoder ring to be able to grasp the intricacies of the confusing plot. (Whether detailed knowledge of the Bible would clear up many of the movie's mysteries is debatable.)
After the potential world war starts in Israel, the real excitement begins. There is panic in the streets and in the air after people disappear en masse. All of the young children and many adults vanish in an instant, leaving their clothes and other worldly possessions behind. Typical of the disasters that ensue is a big traffic accident caused by a truck driver who goes AWOL while driving his big rig down a highway. In the air, passengers on Buck's flight disappear, causing pandemonium.
When people realize what is happening, some of them return to their religious roots to look for an answer and for consolation.
"If you don't put your faith in God, you will be deceived," Rayford Steele (Brad Johnson), a repentant adulterer, warns Buck. This proves to be prescient advice, when Buck has to deal with nothing less than the Antichrist himself.
"You get so wrapped up in life that one day you wake up and realize you've missed it," Rayford tells his daughter Chloe (Janaya Stephens). This painfully true sentiment is like much of the movie, which is overacted but true to its principles. The story has much to say. It is a shame that it couldn't have done a better job of it.
LEFT BEHIND: THE MOVIE runs 1:35. It is rated PG-13 for violence and would be acceptable for kids around 9 and up.
