MALENA, by writer/director Giuseppe Tornatore (THE LEGEND OF 1900 and CINEMA PARADISO), is a coming-of-age story about 12 1/2 year old Renato Amoroso (Giuseppe Sulfaro), a Sicilian embarrassed to be the last one in his class still wearing short pants.
On one eventful day, Renato gets a new bike, Mussolini declares war and Renato is invited to join his friends ogling the town's beauty, a 27-year-old named Malena Scordia (Monica Bellucci). With her long legs, striking physique, jet black hair, skin-tight dresses and generous bosom, she literally turns every head in town wherever she walks. Once her husband is killed in the war, every man intensifies his desire to be with Malena.
Like a figure in a fairy tale, Malena, who rarely speaks, is more a statue or a Playboy centerfold than a flesh-and-blood person. Renato daydreams of their life together. Sometimes they are actors in movies from westerns to gladiator epics. Shown in sepia tone, some of these are so funny it's hard to stop laughing. Other dreams of his are much more sexual in nature, and her vision aids him in bouts of solo sex. But, don't worry, this isn't some cheesy AMERICAN PIE version of sex. Instead, the movie is filmed with an honest sensuality, and it never overplays its hand when it comes to the erotic parts. (The same can't be said of the comedic, which sometimes goes a little too over the top, as in Malena's trial for alleged promiscuity.)
The movie dazzles the senses. Lajos Koltai's cinematography accentuates the warm peaches-and-cream color of the stone houses, and Ennio Morricone's music is a delightful blend of the sweetly whimsical and the dreamily romantic.
The body of the story has Renato spying on and worshiping Malena from afar. When the town starts to turn against her, he wants badly to be her protector. His age and his inability to summon up the courage to speak to her, however, limit his ability to come her rescue.
If you ever desired an older woman (or man) when you were young -- or wish that you had -- MALENA will undoubtedly work its spell on you. It's a charmer.
MALENA runs 1:32. The film is in Italian with English subtitles. It is rated R for sexuality, nudity, language and some violence and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
