What happens if you single-handedly save the life of the Vice President, killing dozens of bad guys in the process and risking your own life? If you're Steven Seagal, you will, of course, get in trouble with your superiors for using excessive force.
EXIT WOUNDS, by director Andrzej Bartkowiak, a cinematographer whose only other directorial assignment was on ROMEO MUST DIE, is a standard issue Steven Seagal picture. With plenty of car crashes, loud explosions, noisy guns and corrupt cops, the script follows the usual formula. Only in the brief introduction of a dot-com subtheme does the film vary from the standard recipe. Why they needed two screenwriters (Ed Horowitz and Richard D'Ovidio) and one novelist (John Westermann) to come up with the canonical story is the only mystery.
The story opens hypocritically with the Vice President lecturing on the evils of guns in our society. After this sop to morality, the hyperviolence begins. Too bad they couldn't have gotten Quentin Tarantino to do a cameo as the Vice President. Now, that would have been funny.
Tom Arnold provides the movie's humor, playing controversial television host Henry Wayne. Officer Orin Boyd (Seagal) meets Wayne in a rageaholic meeting. Boyd is sent to the therapy session by his new commander, played by Jill Hennessy ("Law and Order"). Watching this intelligent actress being completely wasted in such a mindless role is embarrassing. One only hopes that she collected a sizeable paycheck for the part.
The plot involves drugs, with Latrill Walker (DMX) being the flashiest big-time dealer around. Going to a new car dealership, Latrill plunks down almost three hundred thousand in cash so he can drive away with the fastest and most expensive car on the showroom floor.
If you have a high tolerance for violence and like lots of stunt work, EXIT WOUNDS delivers. Sit on the front row so that you can get the maximum adrenaline rush. The movie is like a roller coaster ride at an amusement park, so you might as well go for maximum thrills. Those wanting a bit more substance for their entertainment dollars would be well advised to pick another theater door.
EXIT WOUNDS runs 1:40. It is rated R for strong violence, language and some sexuality/nudity and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
