THE ROAD HOME (WO DE FU QIN MU QIN), by acclaimed director Zhang Yimou (TO LIVE and SHANGHAI TRIAD), is an exceedingly modest love story that is saved by its gorgeous filming, haunting scoring and heartfelt acting. Although your mind may wander since so little happens, your eyes may tear up during some of the striking visuals. The result is a disappointing film that's still worth seeing.
As the story begins, Yusheng Luo (Sun Honglei) has returned to his hometown, the small, remote village of Sanhetun in Northern China. His father has died in another town, so his mother insists that, following an ancient tradition, they carry the body back to Sanhetun on foot rather than by car or tractor. The snowy landscape of the present is filmed in stark black and white. Most of the movie takes place in the past when Yusheng's father and mother first met. This part is shot in radiant colors, which perfectly capture the rich yellows and golds of an autumn forest.
Yusheng's mother, Di Zhao, a petite young beauty, is played with a bright eyed spark by Zhang Ziyi. You'll remember her from CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON. Di's husband, Changyu Luo (Zheng Hao), is a tall man with a big smile who has come from "the city," where he was unemployed, to be Sanhetun's only teacher.
As soon as Di lays eyes on Changyu, she knows she has found her Mr. Right. She is the certified "most beautiful maiden" in the village, since the woman so designated is chosen to make the red banner that will be placed on the ceiling in the new school house that the men will build. The story explains how it was considered bad luck back then for women to take part in constructing buildings. She tries to win his heart by making the most scrumptious of all of the dishes that the women prepare daily for the men raising the new school house.
The film's pervasive theme music, which repeats every few minutes, could become a sort of Chinese water torture if you didn't like it. Personally, I didn't care how many dozen times it played, I couldn't get enough of it. A week from now, I suspect that this tune will be the only part of the production that will prove memorable.
THE ROAD HOME runs 1:29. The film is in Mandarin with English subtitles. It is rated G since there is nothing to offend anyone of any age. Kids less than 13, however, are not likely to find much to hold their interest.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 8, 2001. In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera theaters.
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
