Nothing like low expectations to enhance your movie-going pleasure. Invited to a special theatrical screening of Bharat Nalluri's THE CROW: SALVATION, recently released on tape and DVD, I wasn't particularly looking forward to it. Having avoided previous movies based on James O'Barr's "Crow" comic book series, I was pleasantly surprised with THE CROW: SALVATION. Although I wouldn't quite go so far as to recommend it, the movie does have a terrific look and some intriguing, albeit overly dramatic, acting. The script is so over the top that it would probably work better for an animated movie than a live-action production. Think of the film as a cross between DARK CITY and a Charles Bronson revenge thriller.
Alex Corvis (Eric Mabius) is a quiet hero who slaughters the bad guys in the most dramatic and painfully violent ways possible. As the story opens, he is about to be executed for allegedly killing his girlfriend. After being electrocuted, but before completely dying, he goes forth into the world in order to seek vengeance. A zombie, neither dead nor alive, he proceeds to murder the dozen or so people involved in setting him up. A crow accompanies him on his journey among the living. Also along for the ride is Kirsten Dunst as the sister of Alex's girlfriend. Although Mabius gets maximum mileage out of his quiet intensity, Dunst has trouble figuring out her character's purpose in the story. So far over the top that his performance is a real hoot, Fred Ward plays a corrupt police captain with a badge the size of a large pancake.
Shot impressively by Carolyn Chen, the movie has a striking look of dark blues shrouded in fog. The red of the ever-present blood serves as the main contrast to the film's bluish tint. If you rent the movie and you find the story a bit too ludicrous, you can always enjoy the visuals.
THE CROW: SALVATION runs 1:42. It is rated R for pervasive strong violence and for sexual content and language. It would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
