When your friend arrives late to VERTICAL RAY OF THE SUN (À LA VERTICALE DE L'ÉTÉ) and asks what has happened, you can honestly reply, "basically nothing." It doesn't make any difference how late, your friend won't miss anything since the movie plays like an uneventful three hundredth episode of a soap opera that you've never seen before.
Don't get me wrong, there are a lot of things to admire in the film, written and directed by Anh Hung Tran (CYCLO), but all of these are associated with the film's look. Shot lushly and romantically by Pin Bing Lee, the movie makes Vietnam look a beautiful country where the living is easy. The gorgeous women, who like to drape themselves over each other as they gab, wear dresses of deep blues. The men, who appear to have been chosen for maximum facial variety, prefer white shirts and like to make their small talk over tea while seated at tables.
The most unusual relationship in the picture is between two characters most often referred to as big brother (Ngo Quanq Hai) and little sister (Tran Nu Yen-Khe) who live together. Little sister, who is never seen doing anything more intimate than close dancing with her brother, likes the way that people on the street assume that they are "a couple." They are unusual in more ways than one. She manages to wake every morning with complete and unsmeared make-up, and he bounces out of bed and begins vigorous exercise without needing to even go to the bathroom.
This slightly moving tableaux is a treat for your eyes, but your mind will leave quite unsatisfied. And the length! Almost two hours. This brings us to my first rule for filmmakers. If you don't have anything to say, at least say it quickly.
VERTICAL RAY OF THE SUN runs a long 1:53. The film is in Vietnamese with English subtitles. It is rated PG-13 for thematic elements and some sex-related material. It would be acceptable for kids around 11 and up, but kids of any age are unlikely to find much to hold their attention.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States. In the Silicon Valley, it is showing now at the Camera Cinemas and will be opening at the Landmark theaters on Friday, July 27, 2001.
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
