BULLY, by Larry Clark (KIDS), tells a shocking and true story about a group of Florida teenagers who committed premeditated murder against another teen. Without pulling any punches, the movie shows the kids in reckless behavior from unprotected sex to drugs to violence. This unrated movie -- it would be NC-17 -- is a powerful anti-drug film since it shows what is possible if you live your life stoned. It also speaks volumes about the story's oblivious parents, who could charitably be called "less than helpful" to their kids.
Shot handsomely on film, not video, this indie picture has a polish and an accessibility that KIDS, which I hated, lacked. And the scenes of the teens engaging in one wild sex act after another -- including one with hot wax -- are undeniably erotic. Clark seems hell bent on making as realistic a movie as possible, and almost none of the characters are sympathetic. The only significant exception is Claudia (Jeanne Orr), a teen who works at the local Pizza Hut and is smart enough to have nothing to do with the murder. The victim, Bobby Kent (Nick Stahl), is easily the most despicable character of them all.
As the story begins, we are introduced to Marty Puccio (Brad Renfro), a shy surfer. Marty's "best friend" since they were little boys is Bobby, a definite sociopath. Bobby has been ridiculing and abusing Marty since they were kids. Bobby thinks nothing of hitting Marty so hard that he could break his nose. Although Bobby beats up on Marty regularly, Bobby is an equal opportunity abuser. He also likes choking and raping girls just for cheap thrills. And cheap thrills seem to be what the kids in this story crave. Sex with strangers and lots of pot and acid just never seem to be enough to stave off their boredom. The movie is careful to cast average to attractive looking actors who appear to be the spitting images of the kids at your local mall.
Marty gets what could be his first real girlfriend in Lisa Connelly (Rachel Miner). Since she doesn't like the way that Bobby treats him, she suggests that they kill Bobby. And when she says "they," she means basically any acquaintances of theirs who happen to be handy, some of whom don't even know Bobby. These include, Ali Willis (Bijou Phillips), Donny Semenec (Michael Pitt), Heather Swallers (Kelli Garner), "Hitman" (Leo Fitzpatrick) and Derek Dzvirko (Daniel Franzese). None of them seems to have a moral bone in his or her body, and they live lives without consequences. The actors who play the characters deliver such flawless performances that they don't even appear to be acting. It is chilling watching them.
In a telling scene, Heather tries to give some advice to Ali. "What do you mean?" Ali asks. "I don't know," Heather honestly replies. These are a bunch of teenagers whose brains were long since fried. They aren't even capable of helping each other.
When the time comes for the crime itself, these kids evidence all of the planning skills that you would expect of social misfits who live their lives wasted. After the murder has been committed, they keep secrets about as well as a bunch of preschoolers. Other movies, such as THE RIVER'S EDGE, have covered similar material, but few have done it better and more realistically than BULLY, a movie that you won't soon forget.
One of the movie's last images is of Marty's brother wearing an ironic "DARE to Say No to Drugs and Violence" T-shirt as he looks sadly on what has happened to Marty. It is a fitting ending visual. (Be sure and stay until the credits have completely finished in order to get some updated information on the teenagers involved.)
BULLY runs a fast 1:46. It is not rated but would be NC-17 for pervasive drug usage, strong sexuality, violence and full-frontal nudity. It would be acceptable for college students and older.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States -- probably for just a short run. In the Silicon Valley, it is showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
