Painful. Painful. Painful. Watching and listening to Chris Kattan's comedic schtick in CORKY ROMANO for a long hour and an half is like enduring the sounds of the proverbial fingernails across a blackboard. Kattan, last seen as the organ donor in MONKEYBONE, uses spastic slapstick to get his laughs. Playing dumb for all he's worth, Kattan does charm some members of the audience, but they can have him. After CORKY ROMANO, he goes on my short list of the least tolerable comedians.
The silly plot features Corky Romano (Kattan) as he goes undercover as an FBI agent. He is forced to do this by his crime family to recover the evidence against Corky's father, Pops Romano (Peter Falk). Corky, a doofus who accidentally does all of the right things, works as an assistant vet at Poodles and Pussies. The film reaches its low point when a woman demands that he put her fat cat to sleep.
Inside the bureau Corky goes by the name of Agent Pissant, which most people mispronounce. This mispronunciation joke goes on and on, long past the time when you're ready to cry, "Uncle!"
After five minutes, I was ready to run screaming for the exits. Pops expressed my sentiments best when he complained to his boys who were fawning over him. "Stop that!" he yelled at them. "Stop It!" Too bad the projectionist wasn't listening.
CORKY ROMANO runs 1:26. It is rated PG-13 for "drug and sex-related humor, and for language" and would be acceptable for kids around 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave the film **. He said that it had a dumb plot, dumb characters and a lot of strange parts, but he thought some scenes were funny.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 12, 2001. In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
========== X-RAMR-ID: 29789 X-Language: en X-RT-ReviewID: 254237 X-RT-TitleID: 1110376 X-RT-SourceID: 703 X-RT-AuthorID: 1271
