It can now be revealed. Christopher Guest (WAITING FOR GUFFMAN and BEST IN SHOW) does not actually have a patent on the mockumentary. It just seems that he must. Fresh with this knowledge, Griffin Dunne decided to make his mockumentary mark with LISA PICARD IS FAMOUS.
Examining the world of fame, Dunne, as documentarian Andrew, carefully selects a subject "on the verge." With her popular Wheat Chex commercial on her resume and a part - well, just a scene -- in an upcoming television movie, Lisa Picard (Laura Kirk) must be on the verge of major stardom and fame. (You remember the controversial Wheat Chex commercial don't you? You know, the erotic one with the couple having sex and breakfast in bed.) Making it as an actress is difficult after the cereal commercial since young Lisa is already typecast. No BMW commercials for her. Right now she's working on her next big break as she tries out for an Advil ad.
Interspersed with tales of Lisa's life, the movie covers her friends, who have their own stories. There are also interviews with actors and actresses who have already achieved fame. Carrie Fisher, for example, introduces us to none other than the dog who rocketed to the top of the canine acting charts for his signature role in THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY.
Even the best mockumentaries tend to delight more with big smiles than big laughs. LISA PICARD IS FAMOUS may not be one of the best, but it does find ways to produce some quite large laughs. Dunne's cast, including those who play themselves, is great. As the hard working chatterbox with almost enough perky enthusiasm to get herself through any crisis, Lisa is endearing. When Advil ends up giving her a headache, you'll feel a tinge of pain too. After all, how could a girl who has worked her way up from playing Sally Starfish and Anne Frank's mother not earn your support?
Among the many star cameos, Fisher Stevens gives one of the best. He explains how important it is to get into the mind of a character. Since he couldn't go to India, he studied for a part as an Indian by staying at a motel run by Indians. His immersion was so effective that he had trouble getting a part as a white character after that.
There's also a dark side to fame as Princess Leia, oops, I mean Carrie Fisher, confesses. "When I got famous," she says, "I got depressed because I realized that someday I would get instantly not famous." A chilling thought. You may not have to worry about this, but Lisa does. All you need to do is sit back and laugh. And laugh you will while watching this little charmer.
LISA PICARD IS FAMOUS runs 1:32. It is not rated but would be PG-13 for sexual situations and would be acceptable for kids around 10 and up.
The film is playing in very limited release now in the United States. In the Silicon Valley, it recently finished a run at the Camera Cinemas.
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
========== X-RAMR-ID: 29820 X-Language: en X-RT-ReviewID: 254894 X-RT-TitleID: 1109610 X-RT-SourceID: 703 X-RT-AuthorID: 1271
