So would you like a show where you can kick back your heels, not tax your overworked brain, have a lot of laughs, listen to well written dialog, and watch some good looking actors and actresses? Well, I have the movie for you--MIAMI RHAPSODY.
First, let's play guess the director. You have a movie set on the East Coast and filled with Jewish people and comedy. It starts with an elegant typeface and has Cole Porter jazz music playing loudly yet soothingly in the background. When it cuts to the actors, you have Sarah Jessica Parker talking documentary style to the camera. She delivers a soliloquy about her life to a never seen doctor behind the camera. Playing a lead role as her mother is Mia Farrow. Finally, the dialog is fast paced, witty, and 80% of the references are about sex.
So you guessed it? Woody Allen, right? Wrong. It was written and directed by David Frankel who does a wonderful homage to Woody. It does not compare to Woody's best, but it is rather like his comedies sans Woody's usual hidden darker meanings.
The movie is about Parker's mother, dad (Paul Mazursky), brother (Kevin Pollak), and sister (Carla Gugino). They and everyone they meet seem to be having or wanting to have sex with everyone and especially with their friend's spouses. This is not very done explicitly--it is mainly handled with some funny dialog. The only lines I can remember are not suitable for printing, but you will laugh when you hear them. The only jokes that had no place in it and certainly did not work were a couple of tired, old anti-working women jokes that I have no idea why they put them in since the rest of the script was bright and intelligent.
The main plot of the show is that mom and dad have been married for a long time. They have fought during most of their marriage and both started having affairs to bring some fun and romance to their lives. In the early scenes each openly and causally tells this to Parker who says she does not want to hear about them having sex with each other much less with someone else!
The rest of the show is just a lot of light hearted dialog. There is not much of a plot. There is no tension or drama, and there is certainly no hidden meanings or serious parts. This movie is like a meringue--not much there but sinfully fun to eat.
The movie runs a breezy and perfectly short 1:35. It is correctly rated PG-13 for a few bad words and an adult theme. There is no nudity, violence, or drugs. It would be fine for anyone over 12. I recommend it to you as a fun diversion and give it ** 1/2.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: February 9, 1995
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my employer's.
