FAR FROM HOME: THE ADVENTURES OF YELLOW DOG is a traditional lost boy and his dog story. It is completely predictable but full of a warm and generous heart. It says nothing you have not heard before, but it is a simple, sweet, and life affirming show to watch.
The fourteen-year-old boy (Jesse Bradford) in the movie is not interested in girls yet and likes boats instead. He finds a stray dog whom he calls Yellow (played by Dakota) and falls in love with the dog and wants to keep him. The boy has good taste since the dog is extremely lovable, gentle, loyal, and smart--all believably so. It is easy to want to keep this dog. He passes up on a cute girl who is sweet on him, but there will be time enough later in life for that I guess. I must admit, I wanted him to pay more attention to her.
His parents are played by Mimi Rogers and Bruce Davidson. Their parts are inconsequential and poorly written. Rogers seems to go from one minor role to another which is a shame since she has a lot of talent. She was terrific in SOMEONE IS WATCHING OVER ME and in THE RAPTURE. [Now THE RAPTURE was an extremely unusual show].
Shortly after the movie starts, the dog and boy get lost hundreds of miles from home. The movie is about whether, and if so how, they will return. You could write the plot yourself. It is that simple. For a kids show though I thought it sufficed. I especially liked the way the boy always treated the dog with respect. I kept waiting for the scene where the boy gets frustrated and tries to take it out on the dog, but thankfully, that scene never came.
There is a lot of beautiful scenery of the Pacific coast and forests of Canada. All of the visuals of the yellow rescue planes and helicopters were particularly striking against the blue and gray coast and the lush green forest backdrops.
The movie runs 1:30 which felt fine albeit perhaps a bit short. It is rated PG only for a few scary scenes of wild animals and dangerous cliffs. My son (almost six) handled it all fine and was only a little scared. He said he liked the movie. He and I would both give it a mild thumbs up for kids. For grown-ups, it is a sweet and relaxing time at the movies but it never engages your brain. For young kids, say under 5, who might get scared of a wolf snarling, this movie might prove too much. I give it **.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: January 30, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
