THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH is a lovely fairy tale set in an isolated island off the Irish coast. The land is bleak and breathtaking and the cinematography (Haskell Wexler) shows it off without ever overpowering a simple story. Similarly the hunting Irish music (Mason Daring) sets the mood without ever dominating a scene.
A supposedly true fable is told to Fiona (Jeni Courtney), a ten-year-old girl, by her Grandfather (Mick Lally). Her grandmother (Eileen Colgan) does not approve of Fiona hearing any of the story.
Her grandfather tells her that they had to evacuate their long time home on the island of Roan Inish a few years back and move to the coast not far from the island. He points it out to her in the distance. The unusual occurrence of the move was that her baby brother Jamie (Cillian Byrne) was washed out to sea in his crib and has never been seen since.
Later her cousins Eamon (Richard Sheridan) and Tadhg (John Lynch) tell her even more bizarre tales of generations back. One has to do with a part seal and part human creature. Especially cute seals are prominently featured in a quarter of the scenes in the show. Much cuter than those in ANDRE for example.
The key to the success of THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH is John Sayles. He was the writer (based on a book by Rosalie Fry), director and editor. Sayles is extremely gifted. Of Sayles 9 movies, my favorites, in addition to this one, are: MATEWAN, THE BROTHER FROM ANOTHER PLANET, and BABY, IT'S YOU--they are all worth looking for.
The movie was very carefully crafted, cast, and acted. All performances were excellent and the movie had a relaxed, deliberate, and measured pace. My favorite acting was that by Jeni Courtney. Although most scenes had her just listening pensively, she was nevertheless moving at it.
The movie runs a leisurely 1:43. It is rated PG for its intensity, seriousness, and slow pacing. There is the natural nudity of a small child, but no adult nudity, sex, or violence. I suspect it will be too much for kids under 5. My 5 23/24th year old boy, as he calls himself, liked the show, gave it a thumbs up and talked about it a lot after the movie. On the other hand, he spent most of the show in my lap since its intensity did scare him, and he hated the scene of the fish being cleaned. Kids used to movies with constant and changing action, may not know what to make of this show. For anyone over 4 I certainly recommend it--it is not a kids' show, rather it is a tale that make interest children as well. I award it ***.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: April 3, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
