THE BROWNING VERSION is a wonderful character study of an older teacher of classical languages at an English bordering school in Dorset. The teacher, marvelously performed by Albert Finney, is retiring under some sort of mysterious circumstances although it is nominally because of his health.
Finney plays the quintessential mean and strict teacher that almost every boy hates. He is called "the Hitler of the lower fifth" by the students. Actually one boy does admit to liking him, and it is because of something this boy does that the movie gets its title. Finney's character reminded me of my Advanced Math teacher in high school who was as tough as nails and everybody, except me, was scared to death of her. I thought she was great.
The other part of the story is a love triangle between Finney, his wife (well played by Greta Scacchi) and the science teacher (acceptably acted by Matthew Modine). Greta Scacchi is a gorgeous actress who also played someone having an affair in A MAN IN LOVE (1987), which is one of my favorite little known movies. In A MAN IN LOVE, it is hard not to want to run away with her. In this movie however, you feel sad for her and even a little angry at her for cheating on such a great husband.
I can not say enough about Finney's performance. He plays a tough character who turns out to be vulnerable and human after all. It would have been easy to cry for him. An extremely touching performance. His slow character development is a testament to his acting ability, to some excellent direction by Mike Figgis, and to Ronald Harwood's script that is in no hurry. It is a slow movie, but a well paced one. It is a sad and touching movie, yet ultimately a life affirming one. It has a particularly well done ending.
If you like serious and touching shows, if you like well drawn characters, and if you don't mind shedding a tear or two, then I heartily recommend this to you and award it ***. It runs 1:37. It is incorrectly rated R. Actually it is almost PG material except for two uses of the F word. There is no sex, nudity, or violence of any kind. I think most teenagers would love it.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: November 28, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
