A PERFECT WORLD is really two movies. The main movie is a serious one staring Kevin Costner and an 8 year old new comer named T. J. Lowther. The other movie is a comedy with Clint Eastwood and Laura Dern.
The comedy takes up a full third of the movie, and it is awful and full of cliches. I am not sure how it got stuck in this picture. My only guess is that they thought the picture would be too downbeat otherwise and might be criticized for glorifying criminals. Eastwood and Dern should have read the ridiculous script by John Lee Hancock and refused the roles. Since Eastwood was also the producer and director, I guess he thought knew what he was doing.
Going for it, the serious movie has two excellent performance in the title roles. The chemistry Costner and Lowther is quite effective. Reminds you of a Daddy and a son who love each other very much, but in the movie the little boy is a hostage. Going against it, is that the movie, except for the ending, does glorify criminal behavior, and it certainly makes you feel sorry for Costner's character since he only murders for reasons he thinks are valid. Interesting logic that.
Finally, why do movies always hold religion in a bad light, but not murdering or stealing? You are taught in this movie to despise the boy's moma (Jennifer Griffin) because their religion does not allow trick or treating, but you are set up to applaud which he steals a Halloween costume because he deserves it. Sigh.
A PERFECT WORLD runs 2:18 for reasons I can not fathom. This is a little movie and should have a brief running time. The editor (Joel Cox) must have been asleep at his desk. The movie is rated PG-13, but I would have given it an R for its violence and adult themes. I give the movie ** for the two lead performances but can not bring myself to recommend the show.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: January 2, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
