FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is about a man (Hugh Grant from Sirens) and a woman (Andie MacDowell from Sex, Lies, and Videotape) who keep running into each other at weddings (4) and funerals (1). A delightful plot. Grant is in instant love with MacDowell. She likes him, but he is merely her "32nd lover". The scene where she tells him his number is priceless as is all of the witty script by Richard Curtis.
Grant on the other hand is scorned as "a serial monogamist" who has, with MacDowell, fallen in serious love for the first time. He has not had as many (8) lovers as MacDowell, and he has been unable to commit to any of them. There is a great scene where they seat him at a table with many of his ex-girlfriends - a real dinner party from Hell as they recount old stories. The direction by Mike Newell in this and most other scenes is right on the mark.
The characters are all written as fairly shallow people, and their lines have no subtle hidden meanings. The writer was content with just making a very funny and light hearted comedy. It really works. Many lines are hilarious. He has filled the script with more interesting characters that you can count. The third string characters in his script are quite funny.
The major scene stealer is the brother (a newcomer named David Bower). He cannot speak, but there is more funny sign language than I have ever seen in a movie. Bower is handsome and wise. His scene at the last wedding is the high point of the show. The funniest scene however goes to Grant's speech as the Best Man at the first wedding.
Although this is not the sort of movie that you will think about next year or even next month, you will have a very good time at it. FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL lasts 1:57, but it seems much shorter due to careful editing (Jon Gregory). It is rated R, but it is a light weight R. Teenagers should love this show as well as adults. Take a date; it's great fun. It made *** in my book and is certainly a thumbs up.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: March 28, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
