SHANGHAI TRIAD is a technical tour de force by the great Chinese director Zhang Yimou (RED SORGHUM, JU DOU, RAISE THE RED LANTERN, THE STORY OF QIU JU, and his greatest of all and the number two on my best of 1994 list, TO LIVE). Sad to say that, although SHANGHAI TRIAD is certainly worth seeing, it is one of his lessor films. Unlike TO LIVE which came alive in the characterizations, SHANGHAI TRIAD focuses its tremendous creative energy on images, nostalgia, cinematography, and music. In fact, it has so much music that one could almost classify it as a musical.
In SHANGHAI TRIAD a fourteen year old boy Shuisheng Tang (Wang Xiao Xiao) is brought from the country by his uncle Liu Tang (Li Xuejian) to work in the household of his boss (Li Baotian). His "boss" and that is what he is referred to in the movie is one of the biggest gangsters in Shanghai. He lives in an enormous house that looks remarkably like a hotel. In it he keeps his mistress, the glamorous but cruel Xiao Jinbao (Gong Li). The movie is mainly about the lifestyles of Chinese gangsters, but their warfare forms an important subplot.
In a minor role Liu Tang as Uncle Liu gives the best performance in the movie. He explains to Shuisheng his duties which include waiting outside Xiao Jinbao's bedroom door, head bowed but never falling asleep, while waiting for any request she might have. In this world highly reminiscent of the Chicago bootlegger era, the men are in command. As Uncle Liu explains the boss's philosophy it is, "Women's business is nothing but wind. Men's business, no matter how small, is important," so do not disturb the boss while he is engaged in business of any kind.
Gong Li is stunning in the film and her voice in the many musical numbers is like honey. Her character is the only one in the movie who appears to be able to control the boss. When they make small talk, being shorter he looks up to her as if she has him wrapped around her little finger. Gong Li is a great actress, but she did not give her usual energy to this picture. As a singer and as a beautiful woman, she is terrific. Her gowns by Huamiao Tong are a perfect compliment to her natural beauty as is her heavy but effective 30s style make-up (Yang Yu and Mi Zide)
Wang Xiao Xiao is excellent in his fixed expressions in showing the fright of a "country bumpkin" as Xiao Jinbao calls him. Everything in the big city scares him, not the least being the gangsters having a habit of killing each other. When Wang tries to act, he shows that he needs more acting lessons and should stick to expressions for now.
Li Baotian is effective as an evil boss. Just when you think you have him figured out, you don't. To add to his evil persona his glasses have dark lenses in the shape of small circles and his head is shaved bald.
The marvelous cinematography (Lu Yue) is full of the city filmed in a hazy dark sepia. This is contrasted with the shots of the bright glistening red sequins on Xiao Jinbao's gowns. When the long limos of that era sneak off one evening, the images are steel blue shining against the wetness of the pavement. The entire picture's filming is extremely nostalgic. Many of the moving shots are evocative of a top notch still photographer. They are so good I half expected them to be selling stills from the movie in the lobby after the show.
The music (Zhang Guangtian) is extraordinary. I loved all of the songs, but the theme music is the best part. It was played again and again using different instruments and sometimes it was hummed. It is still reverberates around in my head.
Although most of the show is a mood piece, the action in the last part finally gets believable and the tension is heightened. Here the show finally comes into its own and delivers on some of its promise. Most of the movie however is merely an exercise in style albeit one well worth watching.
SHANGHAI TRIAD runs too long at 1:49 and many scenes, especially those on the island, should have been deleted or at least abbreviated by editor Yuan Du. The movie is in Mandarin with English subtitles except for all the ending credits which for some reason are totally untranslated - good thing I have the Web to find the missing credits I need. The move is rated R for a half dozen uses of the F-word, some violence, a little sex, but no nudity. It is a fairly soft R and the movie would be fine for a teenager of any level of maturity. Although I was disappointed by the movie and expected much more, I did like it and do recommend it, and I give it ** 1/2.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: December 27, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
