UNTAMED HEART (1993) is a wonderful and truly magical film. It has two extremely strong and compelling performances by the leads, and is a film that makes you realize the joy of the human existence and especially the rapture of love. Unless your taste run to believing the Scrooge's of life, I find it hard to believe that you will not be as charmed by this show as was I.
Christian Slater plays Adam in the best piece of acting is his career. It is so imaginative and risk taking that I wish he had at least gotten an Academy Award nomination for it. It is a brilliant piece of acting. Adam is someone who is either very shy, has a low IQ, or both. Then again, perhaps it all stems from his weak heart which he believes he got in the jungle from a baboon king. He relates his story in such a slow and serious way that you begin to think, well maybe.
Adam works as a busboy in a diner with waitresses Caroline (Marisa Tomei) and Cindy (Rosie Perez). At first they think he is nuts and stay away from him. Eventually Caroline becomes attracted to him, and they have a beautiful romance. Their love making ranks among the slowest, sweetest, and most natural I have ever seen on the screen. The romance is more than just sex. It includes many magical gifts like making Christmas trees that appear overnight in the Caroline's bedroom.
The direction by Tony Bill and the script by Tom Sierchio floats on a cloud. The movie works in all dimensions, but the scenes between Adam and Caroline are pure bliss. The cinematography by Jost Vacano and the sets by Steven Jordan do a wonderful job of providing reverence to lower class housing, jobs, and existence.
Other than watching the great and natural charisma between the two leads, the delight in the show is the little surprises in the plot, and there are many. The plot has several tragedies in it, and some may object that it is too manipulative, but, I thought every moment of it worked, right down to the ending.
UNTAMED HEART breezes through at only 1:38 thanks to beautiful and seamless editing by Mia Goldman. The film is rated PG-13 for violence, preliminary sex, and brief nudity. Since the little violence the film has is realistic and a bit frightening, I would say the film would be fine for any kid over say 10. I loved this movie and think you will too so I give it a strong recommendation and award it *** 1/2.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: March 31, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
