ACT OF BETRAYAL is a 1988 Australian movie about Northern Ireland and how its troubles are not confined to its own part of the globe. Although the film was made almost a decade ago and many of the actors have aged since then, the story seems fresh out of this morning's newspaper. Elliott Gould stars in it and gives one of the best performances of his career.
The only other movie I have seen about Northern Ireland is the excellent, and better, film CAL from 1984. I am sure there may have been many others, but I do not recall them. At any rate, ACT OF BETRAYAL is too long and too slow, but manages nevertheless is to teach and to mesmerize. If I could just get my hands on the editing table, I could craft a great film by throwing away all of the extraneous material. With a finger poised on the fast forward button, you can attempt to simulate this in your own home. Don't give up on the show because the second half features a great performance by Gould and turns the show into an excellent thriller.
The plot is that after another senseless bombing of innocent victims including children, IRA terrorist Michael McGurk (Patrick Bergin from SLEEPING WITH THE ENEMY) decides to turn himself in and to tell whom the five leaders of the Belfast wing of the IRA are. The British army whisks away his family, wife Eileen (Lisa Harrow) and young teenage son Sean (Krister Greer), to a safe haven in some army barracks.
Michael testifies against the IRA leaders in court, and they vow to see that he and his family are murdered in cold blood. His family does not understand why he has turned against his old friends. Michael is alone. They are given a new identity and sent to Australia to hide for the rest of their lives. The original policeman, Brian Kennedy (Bryan Marshall), whom Michael turned himself in, accompanies them to get them established in their new life. The show is about whether they will be found out and whether retire sleeper IRA agent Callaghan (Elliott Gould) will be able to find and kill them.
The director Lawrence Gordon Clark goes for the understated approach which works well with the inherently sad material. Too bad his sense of pace isn't better. One can be low key and still have proper movement.
The acting is all good. Gould is great as a hit man who should have retired years ago. He is excellent as an overweight man trying to chase his prey. You feel exhausted just watching him. The movie is at its best when showing the tedium of the hunt. Most of Callaghan's job is mundane. Also good is the strong but sentimental performance by Bryan Marshall as the caring cop. Patrick Bergin is a bit reserved, but effective as the IRA agent turned confessor.
The film is a good mixture of gritty and lush cinematography by Breffni Byme and Peter Hendry, but the background sound is unrealistic and bothersome, and the music (Bruce Smeaton) is pretty lackluster.
Overall the story and the acting carry the show. Still, too many scenes in the first half are pointless and interminable so that it may drive you nuts watching it. Hang in there because the second half is worth it. The writers (Michael Chaplin and Nick Evans) do paint themselves in a corner toward the end, but manage to extricate themselves better than I thought they would.
ACT OF BETRAYAL runs over three hours. It is not rated, but would be PG-13 for its subject matter. There is no sex or nudity and the violence is not graphic. The movie would be fine for any kid 10 and up. I recommend the show to you flaws and all and give it ** 1/2.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: August 11, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
