ED'S NEXT MOVE is a charming little low budget picture where the actors seem less like actors than people on whom you are getting to eavesdrop. In the press kit, writer and director John Walsh says that after failing to secure funding, he "decided to make the film the old fashioned way: on credit cards." I glad he did for this delightful film had me in constant chuckles. My only big laugh came in the perfect conclusion, but every comedy does not to be a laugh riot like TOOTSIE to be worth seeing.
ED'S NEXT MOVE tells of the travails of Eddie Brodsky (Matt Ross from TWELVE MONKEYS) as he moves from placid Wisconsin to the hectic pace and strange rhythms of New York City. Eddie earns his living studying the genetics of rice plants and he comes to NYC to study under an expert in the field, but having little money, he goes on a hunt for an apartment to share.
Actually, his life and this film is spent in search of a woman with whom he can have a relationship. Ross is terrific as the classic awkward and shy guy, and his awkwardness mirrors the awkwardness of the script, funny thought it is. Although Eddie is twenty-five, his boyish looks make him look much younger. He had a girlfriend in Wisconsin, but she dumped him and even compiled a list of her complains about him.
Ray Obregon (Kevin Carroll) agrees to rent Eddie part of his apartment, but when they meet, Ray starts bragging of his sexual prowess. Ray tells how he recently got into an elevator and four of his ex-girlfriends were in it. Depressed Eddie says, "Four women in the same elevator. I haven't been with four women in the same time zone."
There are several little imaginary vignettes in the film. In one, Eddie and his old girlfriend get together with translators who tell each other what the other is really saying. When his ex says she doesn't like Eddie anymore, her translator says what she mean is, "there's a guy at work who makes the zipper on my jeans melt."
Another vignette involves the distribution of "Official Nice Guy" ID cards. Guys can use these when meeting a woman to show that they been certified not to be a weirdo or a loser. It is a great take-off on the late night cable TV commercials. All of the humor in the show walks the fine line between dialog that you laugh at versus laugh with. For me the script is precious and it works, but the two other reviews I have seen of the show range from a near perfect rating to a near bomb. Actually, I can understand both perspectives, but as Eddie says, "in some things, the more I analyze them the less clear they become." Don't analyze this film, just kick back and laugh with it.
Predictably, Eddie does finally get a woman, Lee Nicol (Callie Thorne), to go out on a date with him. Her main problem with him is that "You're so, so normal." Before she arrives, Eddie gets in an argument with Ray about his attitude about sex. Eddie corrects him, "Sex is not a transitive act. It is an intransitive act." Disgusted, Ray informs him that, "If you talk like that to her, it will be a non-existent act." All three of the principle actors show promise, but Ross is the best. His false starts in kissing are classics, but the funny setups provided by the script should get some of the credit.
The picture is helped by an excellent score which is quite unusual in a low budget film. At first the music is dominated by jazz pieces composed for the film and played by Benny Golson. Toward the end of the picture, it switches to funny folk songs sung by the San Francisco alternative band Ed's Redeeming Qualities. One of their best songs ends with the line, "I wish there were more bad times to see you through."
ED'S NEXT MOVE runs only 1:28. It is rated R for a few cuss words, one very brief sex scene, and a two swing fist fight. There is no nudity. I think this sweet and upbeat little picture would be fine for all teenagers and probably some slightly younger kids as well. I had fun with the show and recommend it to all except those of you who need a highly polished product. The show gets ** 1/2 from me.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 25, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
