It seems that everybody these days wants to be a director. Some people have the gift, but others are lacking. First time feature film director Alan Taylor tries his had at a farce with PALOOKAVILLE. Granted the music by Rachel Portman (EMMA, SIRENS, and THE JOY LUCK CLUB) is full of great whimsy, but the picture itself is dreadful and mean spirited to boot. Perhaps Taylor has promise, but PALOOKAVILLE is on the debit side of almost everyone's ledger who has a part in it.
The press kit claims that although PALOOKAVILLE was filmed in Jersey City, its roots are in Italy. Specially, they cite Italo Calvino's short stories about Italians trying to make ends meet economically after the war. Well, I've never read the stories, but I hope they are not as shallow as this movie.
In the putatively funny opening sequence, three bumbling robbers, Sid (William Forsythe), Russ (Vincent Gallo), and Jerry (Adam Trese), drill a hole in the rear of a jewelry store wall. Rather than finding riches of diamonds and rubies, they find tray after tray of jelly donuts. It seems that they went through the wrong wall.
Perhaps with a more deft approach, this scene could have been funny, but David Epstein's script lacks much subtlety. The robbers steal and eat the donuts getting jelly on their faces and powered sugar all over their clothes. One robber continues to steal the donuts right next to the cops when they arrive. Even hours later, these Three Stooges quality thieves still have not wiped their mouths or brushed off their clothes.
Since their life of crime is not yielding the abundant rewards for which they had hoped, one of them suggests they switch to a scheme of running an illegal taxicab for old people. Russ says they should stick to their original plan since, "I'm not talking about a life of crime, just a momentary shift in lifestyle." To keep from getting prosecuted for armed robbery, his solution is toy guns. "The thief gets the benefit of the doubt. Most crooks in this country use cap guns."
Russ is a dreamer. As a come-on line to his neighbor Laurie (Bridgit Ryan), he tells her, "Why don't I take you to California. You can have fresh squeezed orange juice every day. If you've got a back yard there, you've got fresh fruit."
Actually, there is only one part of the film I like. Russ and Laurie have windows facing each others. After she flashes him one night in the cute and only nude scene in the picture, their romance starts heating up. She likes to strip naked, get into her raincoat, and then crawl into his bedroom through his window. And vice versa of course. In a better movie, I might have criticized this little romantic subplot as needless, but here I appreciated the diversion from the plodding main plot.
The show has other known actors including Gareth Williams, Lisa Gay Hamilton, and most wasted of all, Frances McDormand (FARGO). I am a fan of McDormand's, but her performance in PALOOKAVILLE is lifeless.
In a film that tries to charm you, but is so dreadfully dull that boredom is the only consist reaction to it, there is one funny little scene. When Russ's brother-in-law and cop Ed comes in one evening, the three would be bandits are watching the old black and white film ARMORED CAR ROBBERY. They are studiously taking notes, and this does arouse suspicions in Ed.
PALOOKAVILLE is mercifully only 1:33 long. It is rated R for brief nudity and strong language. The film would be fine for any teenager. I see no reason to waste your time with it so it gets a big thumbs down from me and a measly single * only for Bridgit Ryan's small part. The press kit says she will be in GREAT EXPECTATIONS with Robert De Niro, Ethan Hawke, and Gwyneth Paltrow so she will get a much better chance than this slight movie.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: October 14, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
