John Steinbeck was the champion of the poor and the downtrodden. Through a long series of novels he tried to be their voice. As a youth, he was the first author with whom I became entranced. I fell in love with his writings so much that I read every book he ever wrote. Only one other serious author, Sinclair Lewis, would have that same effect on me and cause me to seek out even his obscure early novels. I've also read all of the books of authors like Grisham, Clancy, etc., but those are just fun diversions.
San Jose State University is having a Steinbeck festival this weekend, and I caught the brief lecture about and the film of "The Pearl." Steve Gold gave the lecture based on notes from a professor at San Jose State who was supposed to be there, but who got delayed at the airport. Since I had never seen Emilio Fernandez's THE PEARL (1945) and since "The Pearl" was not among my favorite of Steinbeck's novels, I looked forward to seeing my reaction to it.
In the lecture part we learned that one third of Steinbeck's books were set in Mexico as is "The Pearl." There are two quite unusual aspects in the development of the book and the movie. This was one of the rare cases then when the movie idea came first. In 1941 Steinbeck met director Fernandez while on vacation in Mexico, and he matter-of-factly told the director "The Pearl" story he had heard from the locals. Fernandez said that he should make that into a book with a movie in mind, which is just what Steinbeck did. He even has references in the book to music which were later captured in the film.
The second unusual part is that the movie was filmed on location in La Paz, Mexico using Mexican actors. Although common now, it was rarely done then. Steinbeck's motivation was, "I want to keep the film out of the hands of Hollywood." Don't get confused. The film is in English and not Spanish with English dubbing.
"This is a story that old men tell to children. They aren't sure where it happened or when," explains the opening narration. From the beginning, award winning cinematographer Gabriel Figueroa's black and white photography dominates the picture right along with the heavy music by Antonio Diaz Conde. Sometimes it seems the story is only a vehicle for these two talented individuals to show off their wares.
The cinematography is highly imaginative. Although much lower budget, it reminded me of the innovative work done for CITIZEN KANE. Figueroa films his characters from below, all the better to enhance their stature into almost mythical figures. His most intricate and lovely scene is at a dance where the dancers and musicians play to a backdrop of sparkling fireworks which create a complex lace pattern behind them.
Conde's music has all the subtlety of a hurricane, but is quite impressive and moving nevertheless. He likes to show off his trumpets, kettle drums, and violins with maximum power plus he brings in romantic Mexican folk music.
As the story unfolds, the son of Indian peasants Quino (Pedro Armendariz) and Maria Juana (Elena Marques) is stung by a scorpion, but the local doctor (Charles Roones) refuses to even see the baby since "Indians have no money."
In a beautiful scene, Quino dives deep underwater without aid of oxygen. He is looking for pearls, and he finds the biggest pearl anyone there has ever seen. When he stands up in the boat holding it, he looks up to heaven, but then gives a devilish laugh. Like an opera or like filmmaker Satyajit Ray's classic "Apu Trilogy," the acting and the gestures are exaggerated, but none the less powerful. THE PEARL is not realist - it either works as a fable or it doesn't. Thankfully, it is a touching fable and is quite successful.
So what would be your dream if you discovered great riches? Humble Quino's one wish in life is not for himself, but for his son - an education. Or as he puts it, "my son will know and through him we will know."
Although some may subconsciously put them down Quino's sentiments as trite, it reminded me of my childhood. We were not very well off, and my father, who dropped out of school in the tenth grade, had a single ambition for me - that I would go to college. That I went on to Berkeley and got my Ph. D. was not as important to him as that enabling first degree. The day I got my B. A. was one of the happiest days of his entire life.
Soon Quino becomes drunk with the power of his pearl proclaiming, "The pearl will make us free." The doctor is now happy to treat his son and even makes house calls. Everyone in town become Quino's friend, all the better to be able to try to steal his treasure. His wife is frighten by it all and warns him, "throw the pearl into the sea or it will destroy us."
The operatic style ending is dramatic and effective. The narrator closes solemnly with, "the pearl, which had been hope and beauty, was turned to great ugliness and death." THE PEARL is a touching movie that speaks to everyone and is well worth renting.
THE PEARL runs just 1:17. It is not rated, but would be G or PG. There is no sex, nudity, or bad language. People are shot, but they fall down quickly and bloodlessly like in a Western. The film would be fine for any kid old enough to be interested in it. I recommend this small cinematic gem to you and give it ***.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: October 26, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
