One of the greatest pleasures in being a film critic is finding unexpected gems. MY FELLOW AMERICANS was just such a movie for me.
First, let me give some background on my tastes. All movie goers have preferences whether they admit it or not. There are always those actors whom they seldom like and certain genres that are their least favorites.
I rarely like James Garner or Jack Lemon although I know they both have talent. Most recently I saw James Garner's in MAVERICK (1994) and Jack Lemon in HAMLET (1996), and I did not care for either of their performances. Lemon is the only actor among a large cast that I did not like in the phenomenal four hour HAMLET. As far as genre, old men buddy pictures rank right along with dumb teenager flicks among the ones I try my best to avoid.
So it was that I approached the press screening of MY FELLOW AMERICANS with much trepidation. That Dan Aykroyd is in it, further heightened my concern. He is an actor I once liked, but who seems to have lost his way of late, playing in such disasters as FEELING MINNESOTA (1996).
Well, let me cut to the chase. I laughed, and I laughed hard from start to finish while watching MY FELLOW AMERICANS. Garner and Lemon are on the screen roughly eighty percent of the time and usually they are alone. The movie consists of one put down after another, frequently double entendres. The script by Jack Kaplan, Richard Chapman and Peter Tolan is full of high spirited and intelligent comedy. The show pulsates with energy and the fast paced music by William Ross just adds to the fun.
As the show opens, Republican Russell Kramer (Lemon) is elected president over his hated rival Democrat Matt Douglas (Garner). Four years later Douglas defeats Kramer. Then four years later still, Republican William Haney (Aykroyd) beats Douglas. The story takes place three years into the Haney administration. There is a scandal about Haney, but Haney's people plant evidence throwing the blame to Kramer.
After a murder, the government has hit men after both Kramer and Douglas. The body of the story is a long chase where the government assassins after them. If it seems far fetched, it is, but the beauty is that director Peter Segal manages to make it seem just plausible enough that the audience does not feel insulted. Segal has a deft touch so that the comedic barbs are delivered with perfect timing.
In a show that manages to ridicule both parties, John Heard plays Haney's bumbling Vice President Ted Matthews, who is designed to be a Dan Quayle clone. He even says, "Funny thing is everybody thinks I'm this big idiot, and its all a big facade." He mispronounces facade as fah-sid.
Haney is a president who smiles constantly in front of the cameras, but behind the scenes is trying to hide the crooked deals he was involved in before he took office. You can guess whom the screenwriters had in mind when they created his character.
Most of the show is about the long chase of Kramer and Douglas. When Kramer accidentally says something complimentary, Douglas is repulsed and barks back, "Let's stop talking. We're about to bond. It will make me vomit." Usually Kramer has nothing but insults for Douglas. When Kramer finds a way out of the forest, he taunts Douglas with, "As usual, the Republicans come up with a plan while the Democrats wander aimlessly in the woods."
When they get a ride with some poor people who have lost their jobs and live in their car, the woman of the family tells Douglas, "I'm sorry, but we're Republicans." Not missing a beat, Douglas replies, "At least you admit it. That's the first step to recovery."
The show has a great gay hero who calls himself Dorothy when they meet him. His role is a small but crucial one.
If you are looking for some good old fashioned humor, MY FELLOW AMERICANS is the genuine article. Not the best show out this Christmas season, but the most pleasant surprise.
MY FELLOW AMERICANS runs a fast 1:41. It is rated PG-13. There is no sex or nudity. There is a little violence and some bad language. Given the level of sexual humor, the show would be appropriate only for kids say ten and up. I had a great time at the film. I recommend it and can easily give the picture ***. I almost rated even higher.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: December 12, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
