So what are the Christmas traditions at your home? At ours, for as long as I can remember, we have curled up on the sofa and watched DR. SEUSS'S HOW THE GRINCH STOLE CHRISTMAS (1966).
In the middle of a frantic Christmas season, there is no better respite from the buy-me commercialism of the holidays than this short, but poignant story by Dr. Seuss. And there are few children's authors as literate and imaginative as the great Dr. Seuss. It is a shame that more of his works have not been made into movies or at least televised shorts. His only full length movie is THE 5,000 FINGERS OF DR. T. for which he wrote the screenplay. (And the only published review I have ever seen of it is mine in the Internet Movie Data Base.)
Dr. Seuss has always been my favorite author to read to my son, and Dr. Seuss was one of my favorites which I was a child. His stories usually rhyme. ("The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins" is one of the major exceptions.) He takes a liberal view of the English language and revels in inventing words. He even has a book, "On Beyond Zebra!," where he devises new letters as well. His arguments are convincing ones. No one who has read "On Beyond Zebra!" will ever again be satisfied with the twenty-six puny little letters we have in English. As he so amply demonstrates, there are so many words that just can not be spelled with them.
The GRINCH is narrated by the great Boris Karloff. His rich and powerful voice dominates the film. His villain is mean enough to be real without being too scary, thus giving us a film which can be enjoyed by three year olds as well as eighty-three year olds. Although he speaks his lines, his voice is so melodious that it is singing to my ears.
The animation is minimalist, but heartwarming. It has all the looks of an inexpensive production for television, which it was, but do not be fooled by its low cost exterior. This is a film with a big heart that manages never to be sappy no matter how familiar the story may sound. Few writers can teach the value of creativity as can Dr. Seuss, and few have his love of life.
In the GRINCH, our protagonist is a scrooge who lives high on a mountain and detests the happy villagers in the valley below. Called Whoville, it is populated with Normal Rockwell style cartoon figures. Typical is little Cindy Lou Who, "who is no more than two," and who has a smile that would melt butter.
The Grinch hates the happy noises of the children on Christmas, and, most of all, he finds their singing an abomination. He concocts a simple scheme. All he needs to do is dress up like Santa Claus. He can then steal all of their Christmas presents, trees, and roast beast. That will certainly prevent Christmas from coming and will provide him his desired gloomy silence.
The morose Grinch has a sweet little dog. One look at the dog, and it is love at first sight for the audience. The Grinch forces him to put on heavy fake antlers and pull an overloaded sled, but the dog smiles and tries hard to please his master.
The songs by Albert Hague are as hokey as can be, but still lovable. This is an old children's show, so you have to give it a little leeway.
The absolutely predictable ending is none the less effective. When the children start singing even without the trappings of the Christmas season, the Grinch's heart "grows three sizes that day." And Boris Karloff says, "Maybe Christmas, he thought, doesn't come from a store. Maybe Christmas, he thought, means a little bit more." As the show concludes, the families in Whoville join hands and sing, "Welcome Christmas while we stand, heart to heart, and hand to hand."
DR. SEUSS'S HOW THE GRINCH STOLE CHRISTMAS runs just 26 minutes. It is not rated but would get a G. There is nothing offensive or scary in it. It is an ideal show for all ages at Christmas. My son Jeffrey, age 7 1/2, my wife, and I all recommend it to you strongly. The world would be a better place if everyone would ponder its clear message. I give the GRINCH *** 1/2.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: December 24, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
