BEFORE AND AFTER is a gripping story of a teenage boy in trouble. His girlfriend was murdered, and he was the last one seen with her before she died. He has disappeared, and everyone is searching for him. His family closes ranks to support him, and his father even hides what may be evidence to protect his son.
From the director of the even more chilling SINGLE WHITE FEMALE, Barbet Schroeder came up earlier this year with a thriller that will terrify parents, especially those with teenagers. The script by Ted Tally, based on Rosellen Brown's novel, is full of problems and flaws, but the stellar acting by Meryl Streep and Liam Neeson as the parents more than compensates for its deficiencies. They both give convincing and empathetic performances and raise an otherwise pedestrian movie into a compelling motion picture.
The movie deals as much with the tensions within the family as those surrounding the murder. Even the father's brave but potentially foolish evidence destruction is derided by the mother. The mother, Carolyn Ryan (Streep), tells the father, Ben (Neeson), "You can't just destroy evidence. What if you've destroyed evidence that proves him innocent?" When she gets tired of her husband's schemes, she cries out, "I just want my boy back. I just want to hold him again."
The dad blames himself since he had fought with his son the morning of the murder and thus "sent him out in a rage." He has the irrational hope that, "If we all keep quiet, maybe they've got no case."
In a good minor role is John Heard as their friend and initial lawyer Wendell Bye. Even better is Alfred Molina as the tough criminal lawyer Panos Demeris, who takes the case when "mortgage lawyer" Wendell begs out. Demeris explains to the mother his take-no-prisoners approach to beating the prosecution, and it infuriates her. She scolds him, "It's not the truth. You're talking about opposing ad campaigns."
Rarely believable are Edward Furlong as the son and possible murderer Jacob and Julia Weldon as his sister Judith. Both characters are underacted and miscast.
The constant music by Howard Shore is sweeping and sad. The cinematography by Luciano Tovoli makes you feel the cold snowy settings and the effect the weather must be having on the characters trying to cope with their misery.
As the story develops, the noose tightens around the son before he ever enters a courtroom. The director's pacing is excellent, and the tension ratchets up by the minute.
I was really moved by the show as I think any parent will be. Nevertheless, I would be remiss if I didn't give you a feel for some of the illogical problems in the script. Without giving away any of the twists in the story, let me just say that: 1) the one time the parents choose to make love in the story is ridiculous, 2) most aspects of the Grand Jury testimonies make little sense, and 3) then there is the show's conclusion. Notwithstanding these flaws, the film works because of the acting by Neeson and Streep and the well paced direction.
BEFORE AND AFTER runs 1:48. It is rated PG-13. There is a little sex, some non-gory violence, and a gory photograph. There is no nudity and the language is pretty mild. The film would be fine for teenagers, and maybe very mature kids a year or two younger. I recommend the picture to you and give it ***.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: December 26, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
