The 1948 version of THE THREE MUSKETEERS is the exact sort of film most people have in mind when they call something a "costume drama," usually implying sarcastically that the show is really all costume and no drama.
THE THREE MUSKETEERS (1948) was directed by the great musical director George Sidney. His pictures include ANNIE GET YOUR GUN, SHOW BOAT, and BYE BYE BIRDIE. His rendition of THE THREE MUSKETEERS is one of his non-musical movies, but he cast a musical star, Gene Kelly, in the title role of D'Artagnan. Although you are convinced that the scene where Kelly will either sing or dance is just around the corner, it never appears. To compensate for this Kelly has numerous athletic jumps, and, of course, he fences in every other scene. The chief motivation to see this version is to marvel at the costumes by Walter Plunkett and to watch the sword fighting.
Gene Kelly has long hair and neither looks nor acts like himself. His companions as the three musketeers are Van Heflin as Athos, Gig Young as Porthos and Robert Coote as Aramis. They dress in bright, frilly outfits of powder blue, lavender, rose, and salmon colors. It strains credulity to think of these as clothes to fight in, but at least they look magnificent. The women's gowns are even more outlandishly lavish. The wide spectrum of bright colors makes the show look like a test for a new film stock.
If you are looking for a lightweight show where all of the actors have a blast making it, then look no further. This is it. The good guys are never in any real danger, and the bad are not particularly threatening. A great costume romp, and high camp too. No one takes his part seriously.
A typical scene is when D'Artagnan first meets the three musketeers. One by one, he angers each of them and ends up being challenged to consecutive duels, scheduled one hour apart. These are abandoned when enemies of the king arrive, and the four of them band together to fight for the king.
The show appears cast for stars rather than roles. Lana Turner is haunting as Milady de Winter, and June Allyson is radiantly lovely as Constance Bonacieux. Less well thought out choices are Angela Lansbury who seems lost as Queen Anne, and Vincent Price who is never convincing as Cardinal Richelieu. Price flubs such already ridiculous lines as, "When we think, our impulsive enemies are helpless."
One of the old time classic lines is Athos's, "It's all for one, D'Artagnan, and one for all." Van Heflin takes this rousing anthem to bravery and camaraderie, and turns it into a trivial one, much like, "okay, let's go guys."
The music by Herbert Stothart borrows liberally from Tchaikovsky, which makes for some romantic tunes. The colorful cinematography by Robert H. Planck takes full advantage of the splendor of the costumes. The sets by Henry Grace and Edwin B. Willis stick to dull grays and browns, all the better to set off the colors of the gowns.
This version of THE THREE MUSKETEERS is only one of many film versions of the novel by Alexandre Dumas. I suspect there is a better version, but it has been so long since I have seen the others, I cannot say this confidently. I remember liking the 1974 version with Michael York, but that was twenty-two years ago, and I no longer remember precisely how good it was.
THE THREE MUSKETEERS runs 2:00. It is not rated, but would be G. There is no sex, nudity, or profanity. The violence is fairly bloodless, and most people die by having the sword clearly thrust into the air under their armpits. My son Jeffrey, age 7 1/2, gives it a thumb almost up. He liked the D'Artagnan part and the sword fighting, but the little blood in the show scared him. He says the film is for kids 5 1/2 and up, and I agree. I give the show a mild thumbs up for mindless, swashbuckling fun, and I award it ** 1/2.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: December 28, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
