"Is it ever too late to do the right thing?" asks Alec Baldwin in his summation as Mississippi Prosecutor Bobby DeLaughter. After thirty years, he is retrying notorious and unrepentant racist Byron de la Beckwith. Beckwith is played with chilling realism by James Woods. He spews epithets like, "All of those other races, colors, and creeds and sissies, they're the anti-Christ." And this is one of his mildest statements in GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI.
In 1963, Beckwith shot Medgar Evers in the back. After two all white juries could not reach a verdict, the state abandoned its case. Beckwith came back home to a flag waving parade. He was the local hero.
In contrast to Woods's intensity, Whoopi Goldberg renders Medgar's wife, Myrlie Evers, as a persistent, but highly controlled woman who seeks justice. She underplays the role, which contributes to the film's palatability. I expected Myrlie to be obsessed and emotional, but Whoopi sees her as pleasantly assertive. Even on the witness stand describing the crime, she neither sheds a tear nor raises her voice.
Rob Reiner's direction gives the movie the same smooth tone of his last film, THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT. GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI is quite a funny film, but it should have been more disturbing. Reiner concentrates on making the film easy to accept. Only Woods understands what should be the purpose of the picture which is to make us angry at Beckwith and at the system of discrimination and hatred that he represents.
The film is Baldwin's. He has the vast majority of the screen time, and the script by Lewis Colick has the case revolving around him -- will the prosecutor find the evidence, how will he handle the trial, and so on. His performance is earnest and solid. There is nothing to fault and little to praise.
Other than the Oscar worthy role by Woods, the supporting cast is the best part of the film. Craig T. Nelson is Bobby's boss Ed Peters. Ed does not back Bobby exactly, but he permits Bobby to let his other cases slide while he pursues what looks certain to be a wild goose chase. Afterall, most of the witnesses are dead, the gun is strangely now missing, and the transcript of the trial has been removed. There is almost nothing left on which to begin the investigation again.
Joining Bobby in what looks to be a quixotic endeavor is an investigator played by William H. Macy (from FARGO). His lines keep the audience laughing. Bobby has a secretary that does nothing but comedic lines and her delivery is perfect.
The script starts at Medgar Evers's death and never tells us who he was and why his murder was more important than other civil rights deaths. Even his brother says in the film that nobody really remembers Medgar. The movie is slowly paced, and material could have easily been cut so that we could have learned something of Medgar, the man.
GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI is feel good movie about catching the bad guy. I would rather have been more challenged and outraged. Reiner makes it all too simple and straight-forward. Luckily Woods, with a relatively modest number of lines, is there to remind us of how diabolical were the man and his deeds. His acting, together with a strong supporting cast, makes for a good film. It could and should have been a great one.
GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI runs 2:10. It is rated R for some profanity, a realistic shooting, and mature themes. There is no sex or nudity. The film would be fine for any teenager, and I hope many will see the picture. I recommend the film to you and give it ***.
**** = One of the top few films of this or any year. A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = One of the worst films of this or any year. Totally unbearable.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: December 18, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
