NEVER, AGAIN, FOREVER is a feature length documentary about the Jewish Defense League (JDL). I saw it as part of San Jose's Cinequest film festival. [The punctuation of the film's title is a bit strange, but that is what is printed in the official program.]
I love documentaries, and I am fairly flexible about their content and composition. I do however have certain minimal standards. I expect a documentary to be more than just a collection of film stock, and although I do not count on a big budget look, I do want a picture that it is clear and bright enough to be visible. NEVER, AGAIN, FOREVER fails both of these tests.
In any documentary, even mediocre ones like this one, there are some interesting moments. I did learn that at least some people in the JDL are obsessed with hate. One woman quotes the slain Meir Kahane as saying, "You have to hate first before you can love." Whether he actually said this or not, is open to question. In fact, the whole documentary is so one-sided that I began not to believe anything in it. It may all be true, but documentarians Danae Elon and Pierre Chainet, by sticking to a single theme and approach, caused their whole thesis to be laid open to question.
The technical aspects of the picture are abysmal. The film is sometimes out of focus, but more often there is not enough light to see the subject. Many interviews are done in a car with the bright lights of the background causing the iris of the lens to close down. This meant we had to watch a talking shadow. Only when another car would go by and block the sun would we get a glimpse of the subject. When you realize that you could have done a much better job with the camera than the camera operator, you know a picture is in trouble.
The director appears never to have storyboarded what he wanted to do with the film he had shot. The editing seems almost random.
I left the NEVER, AGAIN, FOREVER more confused than when I went in. Documentaries should enlighten and involve the audience. This one did neither.
NEVER, AGAIN, FOREVER runs 58 minutes. The film is not rated. Although the subject is potentially quite interesting, I do not find this documentary worth recommending. I give it a single *.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: February 1, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
