RUTH ORKIN: FRAMES OF LIGHT is a short subject documentary by Mary Engel and narrated by Julie Harris. I saw the documentary at San Jose's Cinequest film festival. Ruth Orkin (1921-1985) was a famous photographer whose specialty was black and white images of people. Her most well known photograph is entitled "The American Girl."
Mary Engel approaches the documentary by concentrating on Orkin's life rather than her pictures. This could be considered either the strength or the weakness of the film.
Orkin was an interesting person. She got her first camera at the age of 10, and by 12 she considered herself a photographer. She looked at the pictures of the professional photographers of the time, and decided that she must get herself a 35mm camera if she was to be competitive. Given her financial situation, she could not afford one until she turned 24.
As she grew up, she decided that what she really wanted to be was a cinematographer, but the unions at the time would not let a woman join. Without her union credentials, no producer would dare hire her. She resigned herself to making a living as a photographer.
Later in life she was associated with the 1953 movie THE LITTLE FUGITIVE. This was one of the first films to be shot on location. It told the story of a 7-year-old boy who leaves Brooklyn and ends up on Ellis Island. She received an Academy Award nomination for the script.
Ruth Orkin was an interesting woman and a pace setter, but this documentary about her could have been better. It presented the basic facts of Orkin's life, but I left thirsting for more knowledge about all the photos we saw in the documentary. What was she trying to capture? What were her techniques? I left with little more than a collection of images and some random pieces of historical data.
RUTH ORKIN: FRAMES OF LIGHT runs about 15-20 minutes. It is not rated, but would be a G. It is a close call, but the documentary skimmed the surface too much for me to be able to recommend it. I give it **.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: January 31, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
