"I ain't got a dime," says the opening song. "I don't what to do." It is the time of the Great Depression and over a quarter of a million teenagers are riding the rails. Even with movies such as William A. Wellman's WILD BOYS OF THE ROAD (1933) trying to scare them, the teenagers are leaving home in larger and larger numbers to hop a freight to anywhere. Some kids go for economic reasons and others purely for adventure. The show even has one man, now 72, who still spends time every year riding the rails. He enjoys it so much he never wants to give it up.
RIDING THE RAILS is a polished and moving feature length documentary by Michael Uys and Lexy Lovell. I saw it at San Jose's Cinequest film festival, and it is so powerful that I will never forget it. The documentary's strength comes from the interviews with the now grownup teenagers from that era. These talking heads are black and white, male and female. Their tales are full of poignancy and excitement. I found myself feeling sorry for them and envious at the same time.
One man describes how his father came home one day and cried for the first time in his life. Sobbing he told his family simply, "I lost my job." The boy got depressed and left home the next day.
Interspersed with the interviews in color are old black and white films of the Depression. Taken together, they may move you to tears and at the same time you may be smitten by the desire for such an adventure yourself. Although there are numerous dangers hopping freights from hunger to injury to jail, the camaraderie of the period was electric. One kid, the son of a wealthy doctor, left home for the exhilaration of the experience.
"It was a combination of my unhappiness at home with my desire to roam that led to my hoboing," explains one of the men. Or as another one put it, "It's dangerous, that's why it's fun."
The film is filled with songs from the Depression, most of which I had never heard and all of which I found touching. Still, it is the words that have the most impact. As one says, "It was a time when a man could get killed for the shoes he wore, no matter what shape they were in."
RIDING THE RAILS runs 1:11. It is not rated but would be PG for the themes. It would be fine for any kid interested. I recommend the film to you and give it ***.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: February 4, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
