BLOOD AND WINE is an atmospheric thriller by director Bob Rafelson. In the press information, Rafelson describes the film as the third part of a trilogy with the first two parts being FIVE EASY PIECES and THE KING OF MARVIN GARDENS. Although each of the pictures stars Jack Nickolson, I see few other similarities.
In BLOOD AND WINE, Nickolson plays Alex Gates. Alex, a wine merchant to the rich and famous, has a dwindling business bordering on bankruptcy. He has an attractive, middle-aged wife Suzanne (Judy Davis), but he reserves his passions for a hot young Cuban woman Gabriella (Jennifer Lopez), who works as a nanny for one of his customers. He also has a nice grown stepson, Jason (Stephen Dorff), who is about Gabriella's age.
In order to turn his life around, Alex hooks up with a wheezing old cat burglar named Victor (Michael Caine). Alex and Victor have a foolproof scheme whereby Gabriella lets them in to steal a million dollar plus diamond necklace when her employer is gone. As soon as they have the necklace, Victor takes a picture of Alex and the jewels. The photograph ensures that Alex cannot deny his involvement. "There's no such thing as honor among thieves," explains Victor. "It's a myth."
At first, the marriage troubles between Alex and Suzanne appear little more than a plot diversion. "I've got an idea," he tells her during one heated discussion. "Why don't you sit down at your desk and write down all your complaints, and when I come back, we can have one of those long arguments you like so much."
About a third of the way into the movie the two stories, burglary and marriage difficulties, collide. After that, the film takes several surprising turns and evolves into a decent thriller. Still, the script by Alison Cross and Nick Villiers too often gets mired in its own material. The languid direction does not help. The picture becomes a film noir on slow speed. Tom Sigel's shadowy cinematography and Michael Lorenc's sad music contribute to the film noir impression.
The acting talent saves the picture. Caine gives a sympathetic portrayal of his character. Victor has the finesse of a pit bull, but he coughs blood and may die before he ever gets his hands on the loot. Even in questionable films, THE EVENING STAR being a recent example, Nickolson manages to shine. Here, his once hotshot salesman has vitality and pathos. Only the Cuban nanny figure lacks interest. Her character exists mainly for the men to desire and has little depth.
Although costumes and sets establish the tone of a movie, so can the choice of cars. Ever confident salesman Alex drives a new, red BMW convertible with countless coats of wax. His sensible wife, has a capacious and safe Volvo station wagon. So what kind of car does Victor have? A land yacht -- a Lincoln Towncar -- that looks as tired as its owner.
BLOOD AND WINE runs 1:38. It is rated R for violence and language. It would be fine for older teenagers. I give the film thumbs up and ** 1/2.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: February 14, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
