For me, Australia will always be the land of koalas, beautiful beaches, twangy "English" accents, and delightful romantic comedies. But I guess, every rule is made to be broken. After being charmed by two recent movie imports from Down Under, ALL MEN ARE LIARS and HOTEL DE LOVE, I went into LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES expecting to see another fun Aussie independent film.
While not a bad film, LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES suffers from terminal triviality. Insubstantial films, SIRENS for example, can be deliciously enjoyable if done with enough imagination and wit, but LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES is like a fluffy meringue without any taste.
First-time screenwriters Helen Bandis, Yael Bergman, and Emma-Kate Croghan tackle the problem of a large cast of leading characters by making them out of interchangeable parts. Since the characters and their demeanors are remarkably similar, the writers are able to assign pieces of dialog almost round-robin style among the characters. To continue this modularity, various characters profess to being asexual, bisexual, homosexual, and heterosexual, thus providing an easy Tinkertoy approach to building the script.
Printed quotes from recognized sources are used as scene transitions in an attempt to ameliorate the lack of adequate character development. ("Everything's got a moral, if only you can find it." -- Lewis Carroll. "Always make the audience suffer as much as possible." -- Alfred Hitchcock.) At other times, the characters will leap from their normal, mindless banter into a pseudo-intellectualism in hopes of obtaining the heretofore missing laughs. ("Now that I realize I've been suffering from a simple psychotic depression, I feel empowered," Mia (Frances O'Connor) in a revelation tells her therapist.)
LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES happens at a college campus in Australia. Two stories are developed to advance the minimal slice-of-life plot. In one, a premed student named Michael (Matt Day) tries desperately to find a new room after fleeing from his life-is-a-party roommates. In the other, Mia fights the college bureaucracy in her quest to change majors.
Most of the show is as exciting as white bread. The movie's population consists of excessively pleasant people who in addition to Michael and Mia also includes Suzi Dougherty as Savita, Matthew Dyktynski as Ari, Alice Garner as Alice, Adrian Martin as Adrian, and Radha Mitchell as Danni. Only Professor Leach (Kym Gyngell), representing the establishment, possesses an evil bone in his body. Although there is a gross scene of a man, listed as "Vomit Man" in the credits, throwing up in a sink while Michael brushes his teeth, the film strives hard never to offend or take any risks.
The upbeat and lyrical songs reminded me of those from THE GRADUATE. I rarely notice the songs, and when I do, it probably means I am getting bored, which I was. The print we saw had major problems. The colors looked liked washed out sepia, and the backgrounds were overexposed. Some of the soundtrack had a problem too. Whether this is endemic to all of the prints, I have no idea. The choppy editing by Ken Sallows reminded me of a print that had been spliced together too often and small parts were now missing. The net result was that it felt like a 60s film that was being rereleased without any restoration.
As a film critic, I see just about every film that gets a US distributor and some that never do. I, for one, am growing tired of seeing college students where everyone drinks and smokes dope. Surely there are some who abstain from these substances. Never in a college age film, do I see anyone who says a simple, "no thanks, I don't do that stuff." I am not looking for a big statement, just a recognition that not everyone thinks its cool to get drunk and stoned.
LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES runs an amazingly short 1:16, but I bet you will think it feels longer. It is rated R for sex, profanity and some drug use. It would be fine for older teenagers. Flaws and all, the film does a least have an upbeat spirit. Still, it never engaged me enough to be able to recommend it. I give a generous **.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: March 20, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
