The magic of FIRST WIVES CLUB stemmed from the utter enjoyment of its stars. So it is with director Carl Reiner's THAT OLD FEELING. The leads, Bette Midler and Dennis Farina, view their acting as a chance to have a romp. They don't work at their craft, they just kick back and have fun.
Carl Reiner, whose last film was the unsuccessful FATAL INSTINCT, has some trouble channeling his stars' energy into a compelling whole. Writer Leslie Dixon (MRS. DOUBTFIRE) throws most of the humor into the film's opening act, but the film does not find its footing until midway through, even though the show has a promising premise and likable actors.
The story starts with the marriage proposal of Congressional candidate Keith Marks (Jamie Denton) to Molly De Mora (Paula Marshall). Little known actress Marshall becomes the show's picture frame. Her talented acting is easy to overlook just as a good picture frame will not call attention to itself, but will dramatically enhance the portrait it encompasses.
Molly attempts to reject Keith's plans for a formal wedding because of her long since divorced parents' volatility. "My parents hate each other with a nuclear capability," she tells Keith as a reason she could not even invite them to her wedding. Better to just run away together.
Molly's mother, Lilly Leonard (Midler), tries to talk her out of marriage. "You know what the 20's are for?" Lilly asks her rhetorically. "Having sex with all the wrong people -- not to get married."
At their big wedding, both sides of Molly's family comes. Lilly, who is an actress, brings her husband Alan Leonard (David Rasche), who makes his living writing self-help books. His profession engenders the funniest lines in the film. ("What people want in a marriage is what I call emotional valet parking." "It is important to dialogue and to language with each other.")
On the other side of Molly's family is her dad, Dan De Mora (Farina), an author, and his interior decorator wife, Rowena (Gail O'Grady). Also at the wedding is a sleazy photographer, Joey Donna (Danny Nucci), who specializes in selling photos to the tabloids.
The story's delicious plot cranks up at the wedding party. On schedule, Lilly and Dan erupt. The twist has them fighting, but then humping in Dan's little red sports car. They start an affair with each other, and their adultery becomes contagious.
The broad comedy's ultimate charm rests with the acting. Midler, who looks younger and more beautiful than ever, radiates good spirited joy, and her comedic timing is right on the mark. Farina, looking handsome and debonair, complements but never overshadows Midler.
Danny Nucci, who was the centerpiece of last year's excellent but overlooked THE BIG SQUEEZE, starts off gratingly but ends up giving one of the sweetest performances in the picture.
The film's best small moment has Midler singing "Somewhere Along the Way." Most films today shy away from complete songs. Excerpts are fine, but leaving in an entire song, as editor Richard Halsey does here, is quite unusual.
THAT OLD FEELING builds to a predicable, but extremely satisfying ending. An uneven movie, but one whose stars eventually win you over. Not a memorable film, but an entertaining one.
THAT OLD FEELING runs 1:45. It is rated PG-13 for language and sexual situations. The film is quite mild and would be fine for kids, say eleven and up. I give the movie thumbs up and ** 1/2.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: April 18, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
