In 1994's TRADING MOM, 14-year-old Elizabeth (Anna Chlumsky), 10-year-old Jeremy (Aaron Michael Metchik), and 5-year-old Harry (Asher Metchik) have what seems to them a huge and insurmountable problem. They are chained to an unreasonably demanding mother. She insists that they clean their rooms and generally makes their lives miserable by her requests.
One day, they seek the help of Mrs. Cavour (Maureen Stapleton) since she seems to have some mysterious powers. She knows just the right magical Latin chants for all occasions. Stapleton gives easily the freshest and most delightful performance of the film. She is so low key and convincing that you may want to take up your problems with her. Her omniscience seems as natural as the falling rain.
Mrs. Cavour gives the kids a way to erase not only their Mommy, but all memory of her as well. Amazingly, it works perfectly. Since their father left their mother years ago, this leaves them to cope on their own.
When living by themselves proves too much for them, they again turn to Mrs. Cavour for help. She sends them to "The Mommy Market" where they can view a variety of mommies and pick the one that is just right for them, but they only have three chances. The older kid in charge explains that if kids can't find a mommy in three tries then they will never be able to find a compatible one anyway.
Sissy Spacek plays their original Mommy as well as their three new ones -- Mama, Mom, and Natasha. The movie is little more than a vehicle for Spacek to show off her acting talents. Surprisingly, they seem quite modest.
Mama is a Cruella De Vil type. The script, afraid that we might not notice, has the kids call her that when they get angry at her. Mom is an outdoors type who acts like Teddy Roosevelt on steroids. Finally, Natasha is a free spirit who brings a complete group of circus performers with her. All of their new mothers share one trait. They look good on display but have fatal flaws in real operating conditions.
The plot idea from Nancy Brelis's novel "The Mommy Market" soon runs out of gas. Spacek needlessly turns the show from a fairy tale into a slapstick comedy. If writer and director Tia Brelis could have reigned Spacek in more, the show might have been able to deliver better on its promise. The kids' parts are never adequately developed as Spacek is kept on center stage. Anna Chlumsky from the MY GIRL series shows promise but her character, like the other children's ones, is not well drawn.
TRADING MOM provides totally harmless family fare, but little more. Hidden within lies a much better film trying to get out. The idea is worthy of the Brothers Grimm.
TRADING MOM runs just 1:23. It is rated PG and would be fine for kids of all ages. My son Jeffrey, age 8, thinks the movies is funny. There is not enough to be able to recommend it, but I do give it **.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: May 16, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
