What better childhood fantasy than flying with a rocket strapped to your back? In 1991, Disney developed that idea into a movie called THE ROCKETEER.
The highly atmospheric script by Danny Bilson, Paul De Meo, William Dear, and Dave Stevens is set in a glitzy Hollywood just before the outbreak of World War II. A happy-go-lucky time, full of lavish nightclubs and barnstorming aviators.
The gist of the story is that Howard Hughes (Terry O'Quinn) has invented a personal rocket backpack, but a Mafia group led by Eddie Valentine (Paul Sorvino) is trying to steal it. They make off with the rocket, during the getaway it is switched with an Electro-Lux vacuum cleaner by mistake.
The real rocket pack comes into the possession of ace pilot Cliff Secord (Bill Campbell) and his older mentor Peevy (Alan Arkin). Once he flies with it, Cliff becomes known as "The Rocketeer."
Cliff is head over heels in love with Jenny Blake (Jennifer Connelly), who is an extra in a movie with famous actor Neville Sinclair (Timothy Dalton). Neville turns out to be a Nazi spy who has been bankrolling Valentine and his boys to steal the rocket pack for the fatherland. Hitler has plans to use rocket packs to send a swarm of soldiers to attack the United States.
Marilyn Vance-Straker's costumes for Cliff are a delightful reinterpretation of those worn by Buck Rogers. The sets by James D. Bissell capture a glamour that probably never existed except in our minds. James Horner's music stays energetic and sugary sweet. One gets the sense that all of the cast and crew viewed the film as a romp.
In good BUCK ROGERS fashion, which is the series the show most closely resembles, logic goes out the window. Anyone wearing the rocket would have a barbecued rear and legs. The illogical aspects are not germane since the story stays totally in Fantasyland.
The problem with the film is that it is nothing more than an exercise in whimsical style. Nothing in the narrative is compelling. In place of a story we have antics.
Typical of the slapstick is the scene in which Cliff straps on the jets for the first-time in order to rescue a clown who is attempting to fly an airplane. Cliff goes through all of the canonical gags including shooting out-of-control through a clothesline of freshly washed clothes. Of course, a sheet gets stuck on his face almost causing him to crash. In another scene, there is a race through a crowded restaurant kitchen, and the mayhem causes the obligatory flying food. One gets tired of recycled comedy. Still the scenes of soaring with the rocket are great fun, and they are fresh. Well, fresh if you are too old to remember early science fiction movies.
The biggest failing of the film is the casting of the lead. It is easy to see why Bill Campbell has never been given an important movie role before or since. Campbell has no personality so his acting detracts from instead of enhancing Cliff's persona. Arkin, Dalton, and Connelly give nice performances, but all have done much better work.
Director Joe Johnson seems happy to let the actors in the film drift just so long as the atmosphere stays completely nostalgic. Exercises in style like this are rarely enough for adults, although they can be enough to satisfy younger viewers. But not too young since Tommy guns blast everywhere, and scores of people die in the film. A particularly frightening scene has a guy with his face forced against a hot range. Nevertheless, the picture keeps its violence mainly at the cartoon level. And the acting too.
THE ROCKETEER runs 1:48. It is rated PG although given the level of violence, PG-13 might have been more appropriate. The film should be fine for most kids say 7 or 8 and up, but be careful if they are sensitive to violence. My son Jeffrey, age 8, thought the movie was "good." His favorite part was The Rocketeer whom he would probably love to be. There is not enough for me to be able to recommend the movie. I give it **.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: June 2, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
