The 1993 film RUBY IN PARADISE by Victor Nunez, the writer and director of the current and highly acclaimed ULEE'S GOLD, is a coming of age story with a difference.
Young Ruby Lee Gissing, played by Ashley Judd in what should have been an Oscar nominated performance, has left her Tennessee home to make a new life for herself in Florida. Although she is about 20 years old and in her sexual prime, the coming of age surrounds her business life, specifically getting and keeping a job, not her sexual one. She does have a couple of romantic flings, but the focus of her story, as told in a marvelous and insightful narration by Judd, is independence via work.
In a further twist, the profession she seeks is not something considered glamorous by society. She does not try to save any rain forests or strive to be a brain surgeon. No, her place is in retail. She is perfectly willing to take any job, including back breaking commercial laundry work, but what she enjoys most is her unglamorous position at Chambers Beach Emporium, where she sells trinkets and beach towels. She even travels to trade shows with the owner, Mildred Chambers (Dorothy Lyman), to further her career in sales.
As the story opens, Ruby arrives in Panama City, Florida, looking for work. Since it is the off season, people are cutting back, not hiring. After initially being rejected by Mrs. Chambers, Ruby pleads, "I've done retail before, and I work real cheap."
Ruby is a quiet but resolute girl who shares her thoughts mainly with her diary, which serves as text for the narration. She is also beautiful, which compels Mrs. Chambers to tell Ruby a single rule: dating her son Ricky, played by Robert Mitchum's grandson Bentley Mitchum, is strictly forbidden.
Although handsome Ricky, with his drawer full of wrapped CD players for his dates, looks like trouble, Ruby says yes to him almost immediately. He proves to be one of many learning experiences for her.
Mitchum gives a good reading of the local rich kid who uses people. One minute he puts Ruby's dreams down. ("The selling game can't mean anything.") And the next he threatens her with being fired. ("You know most people are only two paychecks away from the streets. Did you know that?") To reinforce the fragility of her position, Nunez's plot includes Ruby's brief encounter with a homeless family living out of their car and on their way to some, hopefully, better place.
Judd's performance is the centerpiece of the film. Her sincere and calm approach to the character makes Ruby compelling without ever being showy or boastful. Ruby may not be sure where she is going, but she has confidence in her ability to survive and prosper. Judd's eyes are sometimes fixed and piercing and at others, rapidly scanning characters to size them up.
Friends are important to Ruby for companionship but never as a crutch. Rochelle Bridges (Allison Dean) is her buddy who gives her advice, not that she needs it all that much. Eventually, Ruby meets a male friend who respects and loves her. Mike McCaslin (Todd Field) works at the local plant nursery, but his passions are books and causes. Ruby comes to share his love of novels and poetry but leaves the causes to him. In another twist, their romance is as sporadic as it is successful, from Ruby's perspective. Ruby, you see, is busy preparing for the summer selling season.
In a show where the main criticism is that, as in life, it sometimes drags, tragedy does eventually occur. Most scripts would have the character go through a metamorphosis when under such stress, but not Nunez's. Ruby uses her same convictions to get her through it and treats it as just another one of the speed bumps of life.
The naturally poetic script has Ruby confessing toward the end that, "I heard that Hell is when all your dreams come true." Ruby will not have to worry about her final destination. She always has a another dream, albeit usually a modest one.
RUBY IN PARADISE runs 1:54. It is rated R for sex and brief nudity. The show would be fine for teenagers and they would benefit from seeing a upbeat show with such a positive and subtlety delivered message. I recommend the movie to you and give it ***.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: June 20, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
