The easiest put-down of the ever popular Jackie Chan movies is that if you've seen one, you've seen 'em all. Although the statement has an undeniable truth, Jackie has so much charisma that seeing him again can be a delightful little diversion. Afterall, the James Bond films have a remarkable sameness, but a legacy that appears endless.
Jackie's skills are many and his energy is boundless. His shtick can best be described as an action ballet played to the physical limits of endurance and always firmly rooted in comedy.
His more recent releases, JACKIE CHAN'S FIRST STRIKE and RUMBLE IN THE BRONX, take themselves somewhat seriously. His 1990 film, originally titled ARMOUR OF GOD II: OPERATION CONDOR and rereleased as simply OPERATION CONDOR, has a more innocent looking Jackie, if that is possible. This film, unlike his more recent ones, stays firmly in the campy vein. All of the actors have the word "farce" written at the top of their contracts, especially the bad guys, of whom there are legions for Jackie to confront.
Jackie has played in over fifty films and directed thirteen with this one being the last he directed. For someone as young looking and hard driving as Jackie, one wonders how he does it. Cloning?
This movie finds Jackie in the African dessert where he has been commissioned to find buried Nazi gold. It starts with a scene that seem lifted out of INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE, which was released the year before, but director Jackie stages it for much broader humor that Steven Spielberg did.
The carefully choreographed, non-stop action sequences sometimes go awry as shown in the crazy outtakes at the end. But in the final cut of the movie proper, they would get near perfect scores from any Olympic judge. A typical scene has Jackie, riding on his motorcycle, being chased by a convoy of villains in identical black sedans. When he gets trapped in a narrow alleyway, he flips the bike around and drives over them, breaking all of their windshields. And then of course the chase continues.
Jackie's attractions are many -- his teddy bear demeanor, his intense likability, his seeming vulnerability and most of all, his mastery of the delayed reaction. He does all of his own stunts, and it is a miracle that he is still alive.
What OPERATION CONDOR lacks is a compelling story and a credible script. ("Stop hitting me," Jackie politely requests of the guys beating him to a pulp. "Stop hitting me, okay?")
After innumerable fighting sequences we come to the film's big conclusion set in a wind tunnel. This admittedly clever idea, goes on so long it far overstays its welcome.
This fun little show, which has no pretenses, will amuse most people, but Jackie's true fans may view it as a kind of masterpiece of the genre. For those of who are not fans, its laughs will be forgotten minutes after we exit the theater.
OPERATION CONDOR runs a fast 1:30. It is in jarringly dubbed English. The film is rated PG-13 for the constant, but campy martial arts action. The show would be fine for kids around eight and up. I give it thumbs up and ** 1/2.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: July 16, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
