Chad and Howard are a couple of suits from the head office of some nameless corporation. They've been sent on a six-week business trip to a branch office so, as guys will, ever cocky Chad proposes a game to pass the time. Afterall, "Life is for the taking, is it not?" reasons Chad. Although somewhat reluctant, Howard welcomes the idea of some excitement so he agrees to go along.
As the harmless looking trailers for IN THE COMPANY OF MEN argue, this film has no sex, no special effects, and no monsters, only conversation -- so how scary can that be? In the press kit, first-time writer and director Neil LaBute describes the movie thus, "It's a simple story: boys meet girl, boys crush girl, boys giggle."
Like its female counterpart, THE LAST SEDUCTION, the strength of IN THE COMPANY OF MEN is that it never pulls its punches. Movie goers used to Hollywood endings, where bad guys eventually get their due, may find IN THE COMPANY OF MEN disquieting, but there will be few complaints about the quality of the presentation. The acting is superlative, and the imaginative script has minimalist cadence a la David Mamet. The result is at once devastating and compelling.
Bitter white collar workers, Chad and Howard, are indignant about being passed over for promotions and paranoid about the future. Their anger extends to the women in their lives, both of the men having recently been jilted. Chad proposes a scheme whereby they will find an especially vulnerable woman and both of them will romance her. The coup de grace? "One day out goes the rug with us pulling it hard, and Jill comes tumbling after." They will string her along for the full six weeks before administering the final blow.
Aaron Eckhart plays Chad with macho evil and is one of the best screen villains in a long time. His hearty laughter and charming smile glosses over a malevolent nature always lying just below the surface. "Never lose control, that's the key," he advises Howard. And Chad is someone who follows his own advice.
Howard, as the pseudo-innocent who always bows to peer pressure, is played by Matt Malloy. Whereas Eckhart gives his character an alluring likeableness, Malloy makes his such a wimp that his is the easier of the two to despise. Chad masks his devilish behavior with a beguiling nature, but Howard has no such mask. The audience, although not the female victim, can always see through the more transparent Howard. When presented with "the game," Howard goes along even though he admits, "it's way out there." Howard is as unsure as Chad is super-confident, but Howard is quite willing to hurt others to go along with his buddy.
The object of their cruelty is a sweet, deaf woman named Christine, who is a lightning-fast typist and temporary clerical worker in the branch office. Beautiful and svelte Stacy Edwards plays Christine as a big hearted, but shy and unsure woman. Christine has not dated in quite a while and worries that men no longer find her attractive or interesting. While smooth talking her, Chad ridicules her behind her back. He says her voice sounds like Flipper and claims, incorrectly, that she slobbers when she tries to talk.
To press the point that Chad's maliciousness extends to more than women, LaBute includes scenes of Chad disparaging his male coworkers as well. In language most foul, he goes through a picture book of the company's employees telling a room full of men what he thinks of some of them not present. In private he humiliates a black intern so completely that you are sure than the scene will cut before he strips the intern of his self-respect, but as in the rest of the story, Chad never pulls back.
The director has the good sense not to make all of the classic mistakes of most first-timers. He does not try to pack the film with all of his ideas. And thankfully, he avoids shaky handheld cameras and cute angles. Filmed by first-time cinematographer Tony Hettinger almost totally in the office with the actors' faces lit by the glow of desk lamps, the audience's attention is riveted to the screen without needless distractions. Editor Joel Plotch follows the director's minimalist style so that the focus stays on the characters and their conversations.
Chad's depravity knows no bounds, but as the weeks pass, the scheme must unravel. The question is how. Suffice it to say that the intelligent dialog and engrossing story continue to the very last minute.
Studies of evil are by very their nature controversial, but this is a film that demands to be seen. And with three such wonderful performances, it is a film well worth going out of your way to find.
IN THE COMPANY OF MEN runs a fast 1:33. It is rated R for mature themes and some profanity. The show would be acceptable for teenagers if they are mature. For adults, I strongly recommend the picture and give it *** 1/2.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: August 4, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
