Remakes, even faithful ones, are so often such pale imitations of the original that they become little more that frustrating substitutes for the genuine article. 12 ANGRY MEN from 1957 is the most insightful film ever made about serving on a jury. (The 1957 version was itself a remake, see my previous review, of a 1954 STUDIO ONE production, but that piece of cinematic trivia remains unknown to all but the most avid movie fans.)
The great director Sidney Lumet directed the 1957 version and the star-studded cast included such luminaries as Henry Fonda, Lee J. Cobb, Ed Begley, E. G. Marshall, Jack Warden, and Jack Klugman. The 1997 remake produced by MGM and released on the Showtime cable network has itself a superlative cast. Directed by Academy Award winner William Friedkin (THE FRENCH CONNECTION), the cast includes Hume Cronyn, Tony Danza, Ossie Davis, James Gandolfini, Dorian Harewood, Jack Lemmon, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Edward James Olmos, William L. Petersen, George C. Scott, Courtney B. Vance and Mykelti Williamson.
The role of the reluctant juror who bravely votes not guilty when everyone else votes otherwise is played by Jack Lemmon. Henry Fonda in one of his greatest roles played that part in the 1957 film. Lemmon is a great actor, but one who sometimes seems way past his prime as he did last year in HAMLET. In 12 ANGRY MEN, his old talent shines through, but even so his performance is not in the same league as Fonda's or Robert Cummings's, who played the part in 1954.
At the heart of the story are the "facts" that are known by the others but simply questioned by Lemmon. "It's one of those open and shut things," points out George C. Scott's character. "They proved it ten different ways." But crying out as the lone voice of compassion, Lemmon pleads, "Suppose we're wrong."
The white racist from the 2 previous productions is replaced by a black racist this time. Mykelti Williamson, from FORREST GUMP and CON AIR, wanted to get the part to show how universal racism can be. Williamson even personally designed the role so that his character was a ex-member of the Nation of Islam. Although not fully explained, apparently his character was too racist for the Black Muslims. "I've lived among them all my life," declares Williamson's venomous character about the defendant and his race. "They're born liars." His hate is complete and unadulterated by reason or any semblance of empathy.
As the story unfolds, the sure and certain facts from the courtroom turn out to be anything but. And the jurors' closed minds begin to open one by one. Some, of course, resist mightily. "Don't give me those facts," complains Williamson's character. "I'm sick and tired of facts."
The Academy Award nominated screenplay by Reginald Rose is little changed from his original. One of these changes has the extremely minor role of the judge being given to a woman, Mary McDonnell. Although McDonnell is a fine actor, her brief appearance smacks of tokenism. In other updates, references are thrown in about SECRETS AND LIES and about the Tyson-Holyfield fight. These serve no purpose and are unable to make a highly relevant story any more so.
The conclusion is inevitable, but, even if you've seen the 1957 version, this remake is worth viewing for the strength of the script and the fine performances. Every juror's vote change is a milestone along a hard climb. When they reach the summit, you may find yourself as emotionally drained as the jurors.
12 ANGRY MEN runs 1:57. It is not rated but would be PG or PG-13 for mature themes and a little profanity. The film would be fine for kids say nine and up who are interested in such serious subjects. I recommend the film to you and give it ***.
**** = A must see film. *** = Excellent show. Look for it. ** = Average movie. Kind of enjoyable. * = Poor show. Don't waste your money. 0 = Totally and painfully unbearable picture.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: August 17, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
