Although the Disney conglomerate may be known more today for its theme parks, the heart of the organization, even if no longer the largest revenue generator, is the production of animated motion pictures. Once a year, Disney delights young and old alike with some colorful fantasy. And periodically, Disney spruces up one of its old films, and rereleases the fresh print to the theaters.
For those of us who missed seeing, or weren't even alive, when THE LITTLE MERMAID was first released in 1989, Disney plans on giving us a special opportunity to see it during a short theatrical run in the last part of November. Yes, the film is already available on video, but nothing compares with the experience of seeing the lush visuals on the big screen and hearing the wonderfully happy songs in a real theater. Even if you've seen it before, it's well worth enjoying again.
In Disney's recent films, comedic antics (ALADDIN), striking images (THE LION KING), and serious messages (THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME) have dominated. In contrast, THE LITTLE MERMAID harks back to a simpler time when Disney made many films and cartoons in which the story took a backseat to the music. Although THE LITTLE MERMAID explores many traditional themes, such as selling your soul to the devil, it never takes itself too seriously, contenting itself with being a feel-good musical.
Musicals are only as good as the songs and the singers, and, thanks to the Academy Award winning songs by Alan Menken and the film's talented cast, THE LITTLE MERMAID never disappoints. If you don't leave the theater humming, then you'd better check the adjustment on your hearing aid. The film is so infectiously happy that the only possible criticism could come from some Scrooge who found the music too saccharine.
The sweet teenage mermaid named Ariel, done with the lovely voice of Jodi Benson, lives in the sea. As in all Disney films, she has some wisecracking friends, with the funniest being her guardian, a little red crab named Sebastian (Samuel E. Wright). Full of advice, he keeps the show from ever dragging. "Teenagers," he complains. "They think they know everything. You give them an inch; they swim all over you." Sebastian and Ariel share most of the singing duties although just about everyone seems to get a chance to sing a little. Benson's voice is like honey, and Wright's has the richness of a Caribbean lilt.
Ariel's father, Triton (Kenneth Mars), like most fathers, tries to protect his daughter against the dangers of the outside world. In their case, this means the land-based world populated by monsters known as humans. "Will you get your head out of the clouds and in the water where it belongs," admonishes Sebastian, Triton's right-hand crustacean.
Ariel's difficulties begin when she rescues her prince (Christopher Daniel Barnes) from a sinking ship. Going topside is strictly forbidden for all merfolk so she gets in trouble when her father finds out. As always, Sebastian steps in with his judgment, saying that "somebody's got to nail that girl's fins to the floor."
All of this causes her to sell her soul and her voice to a fishy devil, played by a large blue squid named Ursula (Pat Carroll). Ursula gives a mute Ariel three days on land to win a kiss from her Prince, or Ariel will live forever in a hellish, briny deep.
As the story transpires, we are treated to a long series of songs including "Kiss the Girl" and "Under the Sea." As our toes are tapping -- careful not to make noise and disturb your fellow moviegoers -- the animators dazzle us with their choice of colors. Down below, the palette is rich with the aquamarine colors of blues and greens with Ariel's orangish red hair providing the perfect contrast. The land is differentiated by earth tones of peaches, browns, and golds. And the net result is a feast for the eyes and ears.
THE LITTLE MERMAID runs just 1:22. It is rated G with only Ursula's sneer being anything that might trouble the youngest viewers. My son Jeffrey's friend Kerry, both of them 8, said that she thought the film was "great." Jeffrey agreed and went on to mention "Under the Sea" as his favorite song from the show.
